Chapter	1
LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	6
I’m	pretty	much	screwed.
That’s	my	considered	opinion.
Screwed.
Six	days	in	to	what	should	be	a	greatest	two	months	of	my	life,	and it’s	turned	in	to	a	nightmare.
I	don’t	even	know	who’ll	read	this.	I	guess	someone	will	find	it eventually.	Maybe	a	hundred	years	from	now.
For	the	record…	I	didn’t	die	on	Sol	6.	Certainly	the	rest	of	the	crew thought	I	did,	and	I	can’t	blame	them.	Maybe	there’ll	be	a	day	of	national mourning	for	me,	and	my	Wikipedia	page	will	say	“Mark	Watney	is	the only	human	being	to	have	died	on	Mars.”
And	it’ll	be	right,	probably.	Cause	I’ll	surely	die	here.	Just	not	on	Sol 6	when	everyone	thinks	I	did.
Let’s	see…	where	do	I	begin?
The	Ares	program.	Mankind	reaching	out	to	Mars	to	send	people	to another	planet	for	the	very	first	time	and	expand	the	horizons	of humanity	blah,	blah,	blah.		The	Ares	1	crew	did	their	thing	and	came	back heroes.	They	got	the	parades	and	fame	and	love	of	the	world.
Ares	2	did	the	same	thing,	in	a	different	location	on	Mars.	They	got	a firm	handshake	and	a	hot	cup	of	coffee	when	they	got	home.
Ares	3.	Well.	That	was	my	mission.	Well,	not	mine	per	se.
Commander	Lewis	was	in	charge.	I	was	just	one	of	her	crew.	Actually,	I was	the	very	lowest	ranked	member	of	the	crew.	I	would	only	be	“in command”	of	the	mission	if	I	were	the	only	remaining	person.
What	do	you	know?	I’m	in	command.
I	wonder	if	this	log	will	be	recovered	before	the	rest	of	the	crew	die	of old	age?	I	presume	they	got	back	to	Earth	all	right.	Well,	guys,	if	you’re reading	this:	It	wasn’t	your	fault.	You	did	what	you	had	to	do.	In	your position	I	would	have	done	the	same	thing.	I	don’t	blame	you,	and	I’m glad	you	survived.

I	guess	I	should	explain	how	Mars	missions	work,	for	any	layman who	may	be	reading	this.	We	got	to	earth	orbit	the	normal	way,	through an	ordinary	ship	to	Hermes.	All	the	Ares	missions	use	Hermes	to	get	to and	from	Mars.	It’s	really	big	and	cost	a	lot	so	NASA	only	built	one.
Once	we	got	to	Hermes,	four	additional	unmanned	missions	brought us	fuel	and	supplies	while	we	prepared	for	our	trip.	Once	everything	was a	go,	we	set	out	for	Mars.	But	not	very	fast.	Gone	are	the	days	of	heavy chemical	fuel	burns	and	trans-Mars	injection	orbits.
Hermes	is	powered	by	ion	engines.	They	throw	Argon	out	the	back	of the	ship	really	fast	to	get	a	tiny	amount	of	acceleration.	The	thing	is,	it doesn't	take	much	reactant	mass,	so	a	little	Argon	(and	a	nuclear	reactor to	power	things)	let	us	accelerate	constantly	the	whole	way	there.	You'd be	amazed	at	how	fast	you	can	get	going	with	a	tiny	acceleration	over	a long	time.
I	could	regale	you	with	tales	of	how	we	had	great	fun	on	the	trip,	but	I won’t.	We	did	have	fun,	but	I	don’t	feel	like	reliving	it	right	now.		Suffice it	to	say	we	got	to	Mars	124	days	later	without	strangling	each	other.
From	there,	we	took	the	MDV	(Mars	Descent	Vehicle)	to	the	surface. The	MDV	is	basically	a	big	can	with	some	light	thrusters	and	parachutes attached.	Its	sole	purpose	is	to	get	six	humans	from	Mars	orbit	to	the surface	without	killing	any	of	them.
And	now	we	come	to	the	real	trick	of	Mars	exploration:	Having	all our	shit	there	in	advance.
A	total	of	14	unmanned	missions	deposited	everything	we	would	need for	surface	operations.	They	tried	their	best	to	land	all	the	supply	vessels in	the	same	general	area,	and	did	a	reasonably	good	job.	Supplies	aren’t nearly	so	fragile	as	humans	and	can	hit	the	ground	really	hard.	But	they tended	to	bounce	around	a	lot.
Naturally,	they	didn’t	send	us	to	Mars	until	they’d	confirmed	all	the supplies	had	made	it	to	the	surface	and	their	containers	weren’t	breached. Start	to	finish,	including	supply	missions,	a	Mars	mission	takes	about	3 years.	In	fact,	there	were	Ares	3	supplies	en	route	to	Mars	while	the	Ares 2	crew	were	on	their	way	home.
The	most	important	piece	of	the	advance	supplies,	of	course,	was	the
MAV.	The	“Mars	Ascent	Vehicle.”	That	was	how	we	would	get	back	to Hermes	after	surface	operations	were	complete.	The	MAV	was	softlanded	(as	opposed	to	the	balloon	bounce-fest	the	other	supplies	had).	Of course,	it	was	in	constant	communication	with	Houston,	and	if	there	were any	problems	with	it,	we	would	pass	by	Mars	and	go	back	to	Earth without	ever	landing.
The	MAV	is	pretty	cool.	Turns	out,	through	a	neat	set	of	chemical reactions	with	the	Martian	atmosphere,	for	every	kilogram	of	hydrogen you	bring	to	Mars,	you	can	make	13	kilograms	of	fuel.	It’s	a	slow process,	though.	It	takes	24	months	to	fill	the	tank.	That’s	why	they	sent it	long	before	we	got	here.
You	can	imagine	how	disappointed	I	was	when	I	discovered	the	MAV was	gone.

It	was	a	ridiculous	sequence	of	events	that	led	to	me	almost	dying.
Then	an	even	more	ridiculous	sequence	that	led	to	me	surviving.
The	mission	is	designed	to	handle	sandstorm	gusts	up	to	150	km/hr. So	Houston	got	understandably	nervous	when	we	got	whacked	with	175 km/hr	winds.	We	all	got	in	our	suits	and	huddled	in	the	middle	of	the Hab,	just	in	case	it	lost	pressure.	But	the	Hab	wasn’t	the	problem.
The	MAV	is	a	spaceship.	It	has	a	lot	of	delicate	parts.	It	can	put	up with	storms	to	a	certain	extent	but	it	can’t	just	get	sandblasted	forever. After	an	hour	and	a	half	of	sustained	wind,	NASA	gave	the	order	to	abort. Nobody	wanted	to	stop	a	month-long	mission	after	only	six	days	but	if the	MAV	took	any	more	punishment	we’d	all	get	stranded	down	here.
We	had	to	go	out	in	the	storm	to	get	from	the	Hab	to	the	MAV.	That was	going	to	be	risky,	but	what	choice	did	we	have?
Everyone	made	it	but	me.
Our	main	communications	dish,	which	relayed	signals	from	the	Hab to	Hermes,	acted	like	a	parachute,	getting	torn	from	its	foundation	and carried	with	the	torrent.	Along	the	way,	it	crashed	through	the	reception antenna	array.	Then	one	of	those	long	thin	antennae	slammed	in	to	me end	first.	It	tore	through	my	suit	like	a	bullet	through	butter	and	I	felt	the worst	pain	of	my	life	as	it	ripped	open	my	side.	I	vaguely	remember suddenly	having	the	wind	knocked	out	of	me	(pulled	out	of	me,	really) and	my	ears	popping	painfully	as	the	pressure	of	my	suit	escaped.
The	last	thing	I	remember	was	seeing	Johanssen	hopelessly	reaching out	toward	me.
I	awoke	to	the	oxygen	alarm	in	my	suit.	A	steady,	obnoxious	beeping that	eventually	roused	me	from	a	deep	and	profound	desire	to	just	.... die.
The	storm	had	abated;	I	was	face	down,	almost	totally	buried	in	sand.
As	I	groggily	came	to,	I	wondered	why	I	wasn’t	more	dead.
The	antenna	had	enough	force	to	punch	through	the	suit	and	my	side, but	then	it	got	stopped	by	my	pelvis.	So	there	was	only	one	hole	in	the suit	(and	a	hole	in	me,	of	course).
I	had	been	knocked	back	quite	a	ways	and	rolled	down	a	steep	hill. Somehow	I	landed	face	down,	which	forced	the	antenna	to	a	strongly oblique	angle	that	put	a	lot	of	torque	on	the	hole	in	the	suit.	It	made	a weak	seal.
Then,	the	copious	blood	from	my	wound	trickled	down	toward	the hole.	As	the	blood	reached	the	site	of	the	breach,	the	water	in	it	quickly evaporated	from	the	airflow	and	low	pressure,	leaving	only	a	gunky residue	behind.	More	blood	came	in	behind	it	and	was	also	reduced	to gunk.	Eventually,	the	blood	sealed	the	gaps	around	the	hole	and	reduced the	leak	to	something	the	suit	could	counteract.
The	suit	did	its	job	admirably.	Seeing	the	drop	in	pressure,	it constantly	flooded	itself	with	air	from	my	nitrogen	tank	to	equalize.	Once the	leak	became	manageable,	it	only	had	to	trickle	new	air	in	slowly	the relieve	the	air	lost.
After	a	while,	the	CO2	(carbon	dioxide)	absorbers	in	the	suit	were expended.		That’s	really	the	limiting	factor	to	life	support.	Not	the amount	of	oxygen	you	bring	with	you,	but	the	amount	of	CO2	you	can remove.	In	the	Hab,	we	had	the	Oxygenator,	a	large	piece	of	equipment that	could	break	CO2	apart	and	give	the	oxygen	back.	But	the	spacesuits had	to	be	portable,	so	they	used	a	simple	chemical	absorption	process with	expendable	filters.	I’d	been	asleep	long	enough	that	my	filters	were useless.
The	suit	saw	this	problem	and	moved	in	to	an	emergency	mode	the engineers	call	“bloodletting”.	Having	no	way	to	separate	out	the	CO2,	the suit	deliberately	vented	air	to	the	Martian	atmosphere,	then	back-filled with	nitrogen.	Between	the	breach	and	the	bloodletting,	it	quickly	ran	out of	nitrogen.	All	it	had	left	was	my	oxygen	tank.
So	it	did	the	only	thing	it	could	to	keep	me	alive.	It	started	backfilling	with	pure	oxygen.	I	now	risked	dying	from	oxygen	toxicity,	as	the excessively	high	amount	of	oxygen	threatened	to	burn	up	my	nervous system,	lungs,	and	eyes.	An	ironic	death	for	someone	with	a	leaky	space suit:	too	much	oxygen.
Every	step	of	the	way	would	have	had	beeping	alarms,	alerts,	and warnings.	But	it	was	the	high-oxygen	warning	that	woke	me.
The	sheer	volume	of	training	for	a	space	mission	is	astounding.	I spent	a	week	back	on	Earth	practicing	emergency	space	suit	drills.	I	knew what	to	do.
Carefully	reaching	to	the	side	of	my	helmet,	I	got	the	breach	kit.	It’s nothing	more	than	a	funnel	with	a	valve	at	the	small	end,	and	an unbelievably	sticky	resin	on	the	wide	end.	The	idea	is	you	have	the	valve open	and	stick	the	wide	end	over	a	hole.	The	air	can	escape	through	the valve,	so	it	doesn’t	interfere	with	the	resin	making	a	good	seal.	Then	you close	the	valve	and	you’ve	sealed	the	breach.
The	tricky	part	was	getting	the	antenna	out	of	the	way.	I	pulled	it	out as	fast	as	I	could,	wincing	as	the	sudden	pressure	drop	dizzied	me	and made	the	wound	in	my	side	scream	in	agony.
I	got	the	breach	kit	over	the	hole	and	sealed	it.	It	held.	The	suit	backfilled	the	missing	air	with	yet	more	oxygen.	Checking	my	arm	readouts,	I saw	the	suit	was	now	at	85%	oxygen.	For	reference,	Earth’s	atmosphere is	about	21%.	I’d	be	ok,	so	long	as	I	didn’t	spend	too	much	time	like	that.

I	stumbled	up	the	hill	back	toward	the	Hab.	As	I	crested	the	rise,	I	saw something	that	made	me	very	happy	and	something	that	made	me	very sad:	The	Hab	was	in-tact	(yay!)	and	the	MAV	was	gone	(boo!).
Right	that	moment	I	knew	I	was	screwed.	But	I	didn’t	want	to	just	die out	on	the	surface.	I	limped	back	to	the	Hab	and	fumbled	my	way	in	to	an airlock.	As	soon	as	it	equalized,	I	threw	off	my	helmet.
Entering	the	Hab,	I	doffed	the	suit	and	got	my	first	good	look	at	the injury.	It	would	need	stitches.	Fortunately,	all	of	us	had	been	trained	in basic	medical	procedures,	and	the	Hab	had	excellent	medical	supplies.	A quick	shot	of	local	anesthetic,	irrigate	the	wound,	9	stitches	and	I	was done.	I’d	be	taking	antibiotics	for	a	couple	of	weeks,	but	other	than	that I’d	be	fine.
I	knew	it	was	hopeless,	but	I	tried	firing	up	the	communication	array. No	signal,	of	course.	The	primary	satellite	dish	had	broken	off, remember?	And	it	took	the	reception	antennae	with	it.	The	Hab	had secondary	and	tertiary	communication	systems,	but	they	were	both	just for	talking	to	the	MAV,	which	would	use	its	much	more	powerful systems	to	relay	to	Hermes.	Thing	is,	that	only	works	if	the	MAV	is	still around.
I	had	no	way	to	talk	to	Hermes.	In	time,	I	could	locate	the	dish	out	on the	surface,	but	it	would	take	weeks	for	me	to	rig	up	any	repairs,	and	that would	be	too	late.	In	an	abort,	Hermes	would	leave	orbit	within	24	hours. The	orbital	dynamics	made	the	trip	safer	and	shorter	the	earlier	you	left, so	why	wait	for	no	reason	just	to	make	the	trip	take	longer?
Checking	out	my	suit,	I	saw	the	antenna	had	plowed	through	my	biomonitor	computer.	When	on	an	EVA,	all	the	crew’s	suits	are	networked so	we	can	see	each	others	status.	The	rest	of	the	crew	would	have	seen	the pressure	in	my	suit	drop	to	nearly	0,	followed	immediately	by	my	biosigns	going	flat.	Add	to	that	I	was	sent	tumbling	down	a	hill	with	a	spear through	me	in	the	middle	of	a	sandstorm…	yeah.	They	thought	I	was dead.	How	could	they	not?
They	may	have	even	had	a	brief	discussion	about	recovering	my	body, but	regulations	were	clear.	In	the	event	a	crewman	died	on	Mars,	he stayed	on	Mars.	Leaving	his	body	behind	reduced	weight	for	the	MAV	on the	trip	back.	That	meant	more	disposable	fuel	and	a	larger	margin	of error	for	the	return	thrust.	No	point	in	giving	that	up	for	sentimentality.
So	that’s	the	situation.	I’m	stranded	on	Mars.	I	have	no	way	to communicate	with	Hermes	or	Earth.	Everyone	thinks	I’m	dead.	I’m	in	a Hab	designed	to	last	31	days.
If	the	Oxygenator	breaks	down,	I’ll	suffocate.	If	the	Water	Reclaimer breaks	down,	I’ll	die	of	thirst.	If	the	Hab	breaches,	I’ll	just	kind	of explode.	If	none	of	those	things	happen,	I’ll	eventually	run	out	of	food and	starve	to	death.
So	yeah.	I’m	.....	 
Chapter	2

LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	7

Ok,	I’ve	had	a	good	night’s	sleep,	and	things	don’t	seem	as	hopeless as	they	did	yesterday.
Today	I	took	stock	of	supplies,	and	did	a	quick	EVA	to	check	up	on the	external	equipment.	Here’s	my	situation:
The	surface	mission	was	supposed	to	be	31	days.	For	redundancy,	the supply	probes	had	enough	food	to	last	the	whole	crew	56	days.	That	way if	one	or	two	probes	had	problems,	we'd	still	have	enough	food	to complete	the	mission.
We	were	six	days	in	when	all	hell	broke	loose,	so	that	leaves	enough food	to	feed	six	people	for	50	days.	I’m	just	one	guy,	so	it’ll	last	me	300 days.	And	that’s	if	I	don’t	ration	it.	So	I’ve	got	a	fair	bit	of	time.
The	Hab	stood	up	to	the	storm	without	any	problems.	Outside,	things aren’t	so	rosy.	I	can’t	find	the	satellite	dish;	it	probably	got	blown kilometers	away.
The	MAV	is	gone,	of	course.	My	crewmates	took	it	up	to	Hermes. Though	the	bottom	half	(the	landing	stage)	is	still	there.	No	reason	to take	that	back	up	when	weight	is	the	enemy.	It	includes	the	landing	gear, the	fuel	plant,	and	anything	else	NASA	figured	it	wouldn’t	need	for	the trip	back	up	to	orbit.
The	MDV	is	on	its	side	and	there’s	a	breach	in	the	hull.	Looks	like	the storm	ripped	the	cowling	off	the	reserve	chute	(which	we	didn’t	have	to use	on	landing).	Once	the	chute	was	exposed	it	dragged	the	MDV	all	over the	place,	smashing	it	against	every	rock	in	the	area.	Not	that	the	MDV would	be	much	use	to	me.	Its	thrusters	can’t	even	lift	its	own	weight.	But it	might	have	been	valuable	for	parts.	Might	still	be.
Both	rovers	are	half-buried	in	sand,	but	they’re	in	good	shape otherwise.	Their	pressure	seals	are	in-tact.	Makes	sense.	Operating procedure	if	a	storm	hits	is	to	stop	motion	and	wait	for	the	storm	to	pass. They’re	made	to	stand	up	to	punishment.	I’ll	be	able	to	dig	them	out	with a	day	or	so	of	work.
I’ve	lost	communication	with	the	weather	stations,	placed	a	kilometer away	from	the	Hab	in	4	directions.	They	might	be	in	perfect	working order	for	all	I	know.	The	Hab’s	communications	are	so	weak	right	now	it probably	can’t	even	reach	a	kilometer.
The	solar	cell	array	was	covered	it	in	sand,	rendering	it	useless	(hint: solar	cells	need	sunlight	to	make	electricity).	But	once	I	swept	them	off, they	returned	to	full	efficiency.	Whatever	I	end	up	doing,	I’ll	have	plenty of	power	for	it.	200	square	meters	of	solar	cells,	with	hydrogen	fuel	cells to	store	plenty	of	reserve.	All	I	need	to	do	is	sweep	them	off	every	few days.
Things	indoors	are	great,	thanks	to	the	Hab’s	sturdy	design.
I	ran	a	full	diagnostic	on	the	Oxygenator.	Twice.	It’s	perfect.	If anything	goes	wrong	with	it,	there	is	a	short-term	spare	I	can	use.	But	it’s solely	for	emergency	use	while	repairing	the	main	one.	The	spare	doesn’t actually	pull	CO2	apart	and	recapture	the	oxygen.	It	just	absorbs	the	CO2 the	same	way	the	spacesuits	do.	It’s	intended	to	last	5	days	before	it saturates	the	filters,	which	means	30	days	for	me	(just	one	person breathing,	instead	of	six).	So	there’s	some	insurance	there.
The	Water	Reclaimer	is	working	fine,	too.	The	bad	news	is	there’s	no backup.	If	it	stops	working,	I’ll	be	drinking	reserve	water	while	I	rig	up	a primitive	distillery	to	boil	piss.	Also,	I’ll	lose	half	a	liter	of	water	per	day to	breathing	until	the	humidity	in	the	Hab	reaches	its	maximum	and	water starts	condensing	on	every	surface.	Then	I’ll	be	licking	the	walls.	Yay.
Anyway,	for	now,	no	problems	with	the	Water	Reclaimer.
So	yeah.	Food,	water,	shelter	all	taken	care	of.	I’m	going	to	start rationing	food	right	now.	Meals	are	pretty	minimal	already,	but	I	think	I can	eat	a	3/4	portion	per	meal	and	still	be	all	right.	That	should	turn	my 300	days	of	food	in	to	400.	Foraging	around	the	medical	area,	I	found	the main	bottle	of	vitamins.	There’s	enough	multivitamins	there	to	last	years. So	I	won’t	have	any	nutritional	problems	(though	I’ll	still	starve	to	death when	I’m	out	of	food,	no	matter	how	many	vitamins	I	take).
The	medical	area	has	morphine	for	emergencies.	And	there’s	enough there	for	a	lethal	dose.	I’m	not	going	to	slowly	starve	to	death,	I’ll	tell you	that.	If	I	get	to	that	point,	I’ll	take	an	easier	way	out.

Everyone	on	the	mission	had	two	specialties.	I’m	a	botanist	and mechanical	engineer.	Basically,	I	was	the	mission’s	fix-it	man	who played	with	plants.	The	mechanical	engineering	might	save	my	life	if something	breaks.
I’ve	been	thinking	about	how	to	survive	this.	It’s	not	completely hopeless.	There’ll	be	humans	back	on	Mars	in	about	four	years	when	Ares 4	arrives	(assuming	they	didn’t	cancel	the	program	in	the	wake	of	my “death”).
Ares	4	will	be	landing	at	the	Schiaparelli	Crater,	which	is	about 3,200km	away	from	my	location	here	in	the	Acidalia	Planitia.	No	way	for me	to	get	there	on	my	own.	But	if	I	could	communicate,	I	might	be	able to	get	a	rescue.	Not	sure	how	they’d	manage	that	with	the	resources	on hand,	but	NASA	has	a	lot	of	smart	people.
So	that’s	my	mission	now.	Find	a	way	to	communicate	with	Earth.	If	I can’t	manage	that,	find	a	way	to	communicate	with	Hermes	when	it returns	in	4	years	with	the	Ares	4	crew.
Of	course,	I	don’t	have	any	plan	for	surviving	4	years	on	1	year	of food.	But	one	thing	at	a	time	here.	For	now,	I’m	well	fed	and	have	a purpose:	“Fix	the	damn	radio”.


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	10

Well,	I’ve	done	three	EVAs	and	haven’t	found	any	hint	of	the communication	dish.
I	dug	out	one	of	the	rovers	and	had	a	good	drive	around,	but	after	days of	wandering	I	think	it’s	time	to	give	up.	The	storm	probably	blew	the dish	far	away	and	then	erased	any	drag-marks	or	scuffs	that	might	have led	to	a	trail.	Probably	buried	it,	too.
I	spent	most	of	today	out	at	what’s	left	of	the	communication	array. It’s	really	a	sorry	sight.	I	may	as	well	yell	toward	Earth	for	all	the	good that	damned	thing	will	do	me.
I	could	throw	together	a	rudimentary	dish	out	of	metal	I	find	around the	base,	but	this	isn’t	some	walkie-talkie	I’m	working	with	here. Communicating	from	Mars	to	Earth	is	a	pretty	big	deal,	and	requires extremely	specialized	equipment.	I	won’t	be	able	to	whip	something	up with	tinfoil	and	gum.
I	need	to	ration	my	EVAs	as	well	as	food.	The	CO2	filters	are	not cleanable.	Once	they’re	saturated,	they’re	done.	The	mission	accounted for	a	4-hour	EVA	per	crewmember	per	day.	Fortunately,	CO2	filters	are light	and	small	so	NASA	had	the	luxury	of	sending	more	than	we	needed. All	told,	I	have	about	1500	hours	worth	of	CO2	filters.	After	that,	any EVAs	I	do	will	have	to	be	managed	with	bloodletting	the	air.
1500	hours	may	sound	like	a	lot,	but	I’m	faced	with	spending	at	least 4	years	here	if	I’m	going	to	have	any	hope	of	rescue,	with	a	minimum	of several	hours	per	week	dedicated	to	sweeping	off	the	solar	array. Anyway.	No	needless	EVAs.

In	other	news,	I’m	starting	to	come	up	with	an	idea	for	food.	My botany	background	may	come	in	useful	after	all.
Why	bring	a	botanist	to	Mars?	After	all,	it’s	famous	for	not	having anything	growing	here.	Well,	the	idea	was	to	figure	out	how	well	things grow	in	Martian	gravity,	and	see	what,	if	anything,	we	can	do	with Martian	soil.	The	short	answer	is:	quite	a	lot…	almost.	Martian	soil	has the	basic	building	blocks	needed	for	plant	growth,	but	there’s	a	lot	of stuff	going	on	in	Earth	soil	that	Mars	soil	doesn’t	have,	even	when	it’s placed	in	an	Earth-atmosphere	and	given	plenty	of	water.	Bacterial activity,	certain	nutrients	provided	by	animal	life,	etc.	None	of	that	is happening	on	Mars.	One	of	my	tasks	for	the	mission	was	to	see	how plants	grow	here,	in	various	combinations	of	Earth	or	Mars	soil	and atmosphere.
That’s	why	I	have	a	small	amount	of	Earth	soil	and	a	bunch	of	plant seeds	with	me.
I	can’t	get	too	excited,	however.	It’s	about	the	amount	of	soil	you’d put	in	a	window	planter-box,	and	the	only	seeds	I	have	are	a	few	species of	grass	and	ferns.	They’re	the	most	rugged	and	easily	grown	plants	on earth,	so	NASA	picked	them	as	the	test	subjects.
So	I	have	two	problems:	not	enough	dirt,	and	nothing	edible	to	plant in	it.
But	I’m	a	botanist,	damn	it.	I	should	be	able	to	find	a	way	to	make this	happen.	If	I	don’t,	I’ll	be	a	really	hungry	botanist	in	about	a	year.


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	11

I	wonder	how	the	Cubs	are	doing.


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	14

I	got	my	undergrad	degree	at	the	University	of	Chicago.	Half	the people	who	studied	botany	were	hippies	who	thought	they	could	return	to some	natural	world	system.	Somehow	feeding	7	billion	people	through pure	gathering.	They	spent	most	of	their	time	working	out	better	ways	to grow	pot.	I	didn’t	like	them.	I’ve	always	been	in	it	for	the	science,	not	for any	New	World	Order	bullshit.
When	they	made	compost	heaps	and	tried	to	conserve	every	little ounce	of	living	matter,	I	laughed	at	them.	“Look	at	the	silly	hippies!”	I would	scoff.	“Look	at	their	pathetic	attempts	to	simulate	a	complex global	ecosystem	in	their	back	yard.”
Of	course	now	I’m	doing	exactly	that.	I’m	saving	every	scrap	of biomatter	I	can	find.	Every	time	I	finish	a	meal,	the	leftovers	go	to	the compost	bucket.	As	for	other	biological	material…
The	Hab	has	sophisticated	toilets.	Shit	is	usually	vaccum-dried,	then accumulated	in	sealed	bags	to	be	discarded	on	the	surface.
Not	any	more!
In	fact,	I	even	did	an	EVA	to	recover	the	previous	bags	of	shit	from before	the	crew	left.	Being	completely	desiccated,	this	particular	shit didn’t	have	bacteria	in	it	anymore,	but	it	still	had	complex	proteins	and would	serve	as	useful	manure.	Adding	it	to	water	and	active	bacteria would	quickly	get	it	inundated,	replacing	any	population	killed	by	the Toilet	Of	Doom.
I	found	a	big	container	and	filled	it	with	a	bit	of	water,	then	added	the dried	shit.	Since	then,	I’ve	added	my	own	shit	to	it	as	well.	The	worse	it smells,	the	more	successful	things	are	going.	That’s	the	bacteria	at	work!
Once	I	get	some	Martian	soil	in	here,	I	can	mix	in	the	shit	and	spread it	out.	Then	I	can	sprinkle	the	Earth	soil	on	top.	You	might	not	think	that would	be	an	important	step,	but	it	is.	There	are	dozens	of	species	of bacteria	living	in	Earth	soil,	and	they're	critical	to	plant	growth.	They'll spread	out	and	breed	like...	well,	like	a	bacterial	infection..
Within	a	week,	the	Martian	soil	will	be	ready	for	plants	to	germinate in.	But	I	won’t	plant	yet.	I’ll	spread	it	out	over	a	doubled	area.	It’ll “infect”	the	new	Martian	soil.	After	another	week,	I’ll	double	it	again. And	so	on.	Of	course,	all	the	while,	I’ll	be	adding	all	new	manure	to	the effort.
My	asshole	is	doing	as	much	to	keep	me	alive	as	my	brain.
This	isn’t	a	new	concept	I	just	came	up	with.	People	have	speculated on	how	to	make	crop	soil	out	of	Martian	dirt	for	decades.	I’ll	just	be putting	it	to	the	test	for	the	first	time.
I	searched	through	the	food	supplies	and	found	all	sorts	of	things	that I	can	plant.	Peas,	for	instance.	Plenty	of	beans,	too.	I	also	found	several potatoes.	If	*any*	of	them	can	still	germinate	after	their	ordeal,	that’ll	be great.	With	a	nearly	infinite	supply	of	vitamins,	all	I	need	are	calories	of any	kind	to	survive.
The	total	floor-space	of	the	Hab	is	about	92	square	meters.	I	plan	to dedicate	all	of	it	to	this	endeavor.	I	don’t	mind	walking	on	dirt.	It’ll	be	a lot	of	work,	but	I’m	going	to	need	to	cover	the	entire	floor	to	a	depth	of 10	cm.	That	means	I’ll	have	to	transport	9.2	cubic	meters	of	Martian	soil in	to	the	Hab.	I	can	get	maybe	1/10th	of	a	cubic	meter	in	through	the airlock	at	a	time,	and	it’ll	be	backbreaking	work	to	collect	it.	But	in	the end,	if	everything	goes	to	plan,	I’ll	have	92	square	meters	of	croppable soil.
Hell	yeah	I’m	a	botanist!	Fear	my	botany	powers!


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	15

Ugh!	This	is	backbreaking	work!
I	spent	12	hours	today	on	EVAs	to	bring	dirt	in	to	the	Hab.	I	only managed	to	cover	a	small	corner	of	the	base,	maybe	5	square	meters.	At this	rate	it’ll	take	me	weeks	to	get	all	the	soil	in.	But	hey,	time	is	one thing	I’ve	got.
The	first	few	EVAs	were	pretty	inefficient;	me	filling	small containers	and	bringing	them	in	through	the	airlock.	Then	I	got	wise	and just	put	one	big	container	in	the	airlock	itself	and	filled	that	with	small containers	till	it	was	full.	That	sped	things	up	a	lot	because	the	airlock takes	about	10	minutes	to	get	through.
I	ache	all	over.	And	the	shovels	I	have	are	made	for	taking	samples, not	heavy	digging.	My	back	is	killing	me.	I	foraged	in	the	medical supplies	and	found	some	Vicodin.	I	took	it	about	10	minutes	ago.	Should be	kicking	in	soon.
Anyway,	it’s	nice	to	see	progress.	Time	to	start	getting	the	bacteria	to work	on	these	minerals.	After	lunch.	No	3/4	ration	today.	I’ve	earned	a full	meal.


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	16

One	complication	I	hadn’t	though	of:	Water.
Turns	out	being	on	the	surface	of	Mars	for	a	few	million	years eliminates	all	the	water	in	the	soil.	My	master’s	degree	in	botany	makes me	pretty	sure	plants	need	wet	dirt	to	grow	in.	Not	to	mention	the bacteria	that	has	to	live	in	it	first.
Fortunately,	I	have	water.	But	not	as	much	as	I	want.	To	be	viable, soil	needs	40	liters	of	water	per	cubic	meter.	My	overall	plan	calls	for	9.2 cubic	meters	of	soil.	So	I’ll	eventually	need	368	liters	of	water	to	feed	it.
The	Hab	has	an	excellent	Water	Reclaimer.	Best	technology	available on	Earth.	So	NASA	figured	“why	send	a	lot	of	water	up	there?	Just	send enough	for	an	emergency.”	Humans	need	3	liters	of	water	per	day	to	be comfortable.	They	gave	us	50	liters	each.	There	are	300	liters	total	in	the Hab.
Looks	like	I	won’t	be	able	to	cover	the	whole	surface	of	the	Hab	with fertile	soil.	I’m	willing	to	dedicate	all	but	an	emergency	50	liters	to	the cause.	That	means	I	can	feed	62.5	square	meters	at	a	depth	of	10cm. About	2/3	of	the	Hab’s	floor.	It’ll	have	to	do.	Anyway,	I’ve	only	got	a paltry	5	square	meters	covered	at	the	moment.
After	that,	things	got	disgusting.	I	spent	three	hours	spreading	shit	on Martian	sand.	I	didn’t	have	to	do	it	with	my	hands,	at	least.
I	spread	the	sand	out	in	a	corner	of	the	Hab,	about	10cm	thick.	I wadded	up	a	few	blankets	and	uniforms	from	my	departed	crewmates	to serve	as	one	edge	of	a	planter	box	(with	the	curved	walls	of	the	Hab	being the	rest	of	the	perimeter).	Then	I	sacrificed	20	liters	of	precious	water	to the	dirt	gods.
5	square	meters	was	about	right	for	the	amount	of	manure	I	had handy.	I	dumped	my	big	container	o’	shit	on	to	the	soil	and	nearly	puked from	the	smell.
That	smell’s	going	to	stick	around	for	a	while,	too.	It’s	not	like	I	can open	a	window.	Still,	you	get	used	to	it.	I	mixed	this	soil	and	shit	together with	a	shovel,	and	spread	it	out	evenly	again.	Then	I	sprinkled	the	Earth soil	on	top.	Get	to	work,	bacteria.	I’m	counting	on	you.
In	other	news,	today	is	Thanksgiving.	My	family	will	be	gathering	in Chicago	for	the	usual	feast	at	my	parent's	house.	My	guess	is	it	won't	be much	fun,	what	with	me	having	died	11	days	ago.	Hell,	they	probably	just got	done	gathering	for	my	funeral.
I	wonder	if	they'll	ever	find	out	what	really	happened.


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	22

Wow.	Things	really	came	along.
I	got	all	the	sand	in	and	ready	to	go.	2/3	of	the	base	is	now	dirt.	And today	I	executed	my	first	dirt-doubling.	It's	been	a	week,	and	the	former Martian	soil	was	rich	and	lovely.	Two	more	doublings	and	I	will	have covered	the	whole	field.
All	that	work	was	great	for	my	morale.	It	gave	me	something	to	do. But	after	things	settled	down	a	bit,	and	I	had	dinner	while	listening	to Johanssen’s	Beatles	music	collection,	I	got	depressed	again.
Doing	the	math,	this	won’t	keep	me	from	starving.
My	best	bet	for	making	calories	is	potatoes.	They	grow	prolifically and	have	a	reasonable	caloric	content	(770	calories	per	kg).	I’m	pretty sure	the	ones	I	have	will	germinate.	Problem	is	I	can’t	grow	enough	of them.	In	62	square	meters,	I	could	grow	maybe	150kg	of	potatoes	in	400 days	(the	time	I	have	before	running	out	of	food).	That’s	a	grand	total	of 115,500	calories,	a	sustainable	average	of	288	calories	per	day.	With	my height	and	weight,	if	I’m	willing	to	starve	a	little,	I	need	1500	calories per	day.
Not	even	close.
So	I	can’t	just	live	off	the	land	for	ever.	But	I	can	extend	my	life.	The potatoes	will	last	me	76	days.
Potatoes	grow	continually,	so	in	those	76	days,	I	can	grow	another 22,000	calories	of	potatoes,	which	will	tide	me	over	for	another	15	days. After	that,	it’s	kind	of	pointless	to	continue	the	trend.	All	told	it	buys	me about	90	days.
So	now	I’ll	start	starving	to	death	on	Sol	490	instead	of	Sol	400.	It’s progress,	but	any	hope	of	survival	rests	on	me	surviving	until	Sol	1412, when	Ares	4	will	land.
There’s	about	a	thousand	days	of	food	I	don’t	have.	And	I	don’t	have a	plan	for	how	to	get	it.
Shit.
Chapter	3

LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	25

Remember	those	old	math	questions	you	had	in	Algebra	class?	Where water	is	entering	a	container	at	a	certain	rate	and	leaving	at	a	different rate	and	you	need	to	figure	out	when	it’ll	be	empty?	Well,	that	concept	is critical	to	the	“Mark	Watney	doesn’t	die”	project	I’m	working	on.
I	need	to	create	calories.	And	I	need	enough	to	last	four	years.	I	figure if	I	don’t	get	rescued	by	Ares	4,	I’m	dead	anyway.	So	that’s	my	target: four	years.
I	have	plenty	of	multivitamins;	over	double	what	I	need.	And	there’s five	times	the	minimum	protein	in	each	food	pack,	so	careful	rationing	of portions	takes	care	of	my	protein	needs	for	at	least	four	years.	My	general nutrition	is	taken	care	of.	I	just	need	calories.
I	need	1500	calories	every	day.	I	have	400	days	of	food	to	start	off with.	So	how	many	calories	do	I	need	to	generate	per	day	along	the	entire time	period	to	stay	alive	for	1400	days	total	(the	time	till	Ares	4	arrives)? I’ll	spare	you	the	math.	The	answer	is	a	cool	1000.	I	need	to	create 1000	calories	per	day	with	my	farming	efforts	to	survive	until	Ares	4	gets here.	Actually,	a	little	more	than	that,	because	it’s	sol	25	right	now	and	I haven’t	actually	planted	anything	yet.
With	my	62	square	meters	of	farmland,	I’ll	be	able	to	create	about 288	calories	per	day.	I	need	to	bring	that	up	to	1000.	I	need	four	times	my current	plan’s	production	to	survive.
I	need	more	surface	area	for	farming,	and	I	need	water	to	hydrate	the soil.	So	let’s	take	the	problems	one	at	a	time.
How	much	farmland	can	I	really	make?
There	are	92	square	meters	in	the	Hab.	Let’s	say	I	could	make	use	of all	of	it.
Also,	there	are	five	unused	bunks.	Let’s	say	I	put	soil	in	on	them,	too. They’re	2	square	meters	each,	giving	me	10	more	square	meters.	So we’re	up	to	102.
The	Hab	has	three	lab	tables,	each	about	2	square	meters.	I	want	to keep	one	for	my	own	use,	leaving	two	for	the	cause.	That’s	another	four square	meters,	bringing	the	total	to	106.
I	have	two	Martian	rovers.	They	have	pressure	seals,	allowing	the occupants	to	drive	in	ease,	without	spacesuits,	as	they	spent	long	periods traversing	the	surface.	They’re	too	cramped	to	plant	crops	in,	and	I	want to	be	able	to	drive	them	around	anyway.	But	both	rovers	have	an emergency	pop-tent.
There	are	a	lot	of	problems	with	using	pop-tents	as	farmland,	but	they have	10	square	meters	of	floor	space	each.	Presuming	I	can	overcome	the problems,	they	net	me	another	20	square	meters,	bringing	my	farmland up	to	126.
126	square	meters	of	farmable	land.	That’s	something	to	work	with. Not	nearly	enough	water	to	moisten	the	soil,	but	like	I	said,	one	thing	at	a time.
The	next	thing	to	consider	is	how	efficient	I	can	be	in	growing potatoes.	I	based	my	crop	yield	estimates	on	the	potato	industry	back	on Earth.	But	potato	farmers	aren’t	in	a	desperate	race	for	survival	like	I	am.
Can	I	get	a	better	yield?
For	starters,	I	can	give	attention	to	each	individual	plant.	I	can	trim them	and	keep	them	healthy	and	not	interfering	with	each	other.	Also,	as their	flowering	bodies	breach	the	surface,	I	can	replant	them	deeper,	then plant	younger	plants	above	them.	For	normal	potato	farmers,	it’s	not worth	doing	because	they’re	working	with	literally	millions	of	potato plants.
Also,	this	sort	of	farming	annihilates	the	soil.	Any	farmer	doing	it 	would	turn	their	land	into	a	dust	bowl	within	12	years.	It’s	not sustainable.	But	who	gives	a	shit?	I	just	need	to	survive	four	years.
I	estimate	I	can	get	50%	higher	yield	by	using	these	tactics.	And	with the	126	square	meter	farmland	(just	over	double	the	62	square	meters	I have)	it	works	out	to	be	over	900	calories	per	day.
That’s	real	progress.	I’d	still	be	in	danger	of	starvation,	but	it	gets	me in	the	range	of	survival.	I	might	be	able	to	make	it	by	nearly	starving	but not	quite	dying.	I	could	reduce	my	caloric	use	by	minimizing	manual labor.	I	could	set	the	temperature	of	the	Hab	higher	than	normal,	meaning my	body	expends	less	energy	keeping	its	temperature.	I	could	cut	off	an arm	and	eat	it,	gaining	me	valuable	calories	and	reducing	my	overall caloric	need.
No,	not	really.
So	let’s	say	I	could	clear	up	that	much	farmland.	Seems	reasonable. Where	do	I	get	the	water?	To	go	from	62	to	126	square	meters	of farmland	at	10cm	deep,	I’ll	need	6.4	more	cubic	meters	of	soil	(more shoveling,	whee!)	and	that’ll	need	over	250	liters	of	water.
The	50L	I	have	is	for	me	to	drink	if	the	Water	Reclaimer	breaks.	So I’m	250L	short	of	my	250L	goal.
Bleh.	I’m	going	to	bed.


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	26

It	was	a	back-breaking	yet	productive	day.
I	was	sick	of	thinking,	so	instead	of	trying	to	figure	out	where	I’ll	get 250L	of	water,	I	did	some	manual	labor.	I	need	to	get	a	whole	assload more	soil	in	to	the	Hab,	even	if	it	is	dry	and	useless	right	now.
I	got	a	cubic	meter	in	before	getting	exhausted.
Then,	a	minor	dust-storm	dropped	by	for	an	hour	and	covered	the solar	collectors	with	crap.	So	I	had	to	suit	up	*again*	and	do	*another* EVA.	I	was	in	a	pissy	mood	the	whole	time.	Sweeping	off	a	huge	field	of solar	cells	is	boring	and	physically	demanding.	But	once	the	job	was done,	I	came	back	to	my	Little	Hab	on	the	Prairie.
It	was	about	time	for	another	dirt-doubling,	so	I	figured	I	may	as	well get	it	over	with.	It	took	an	hour.	One	more	doubling	and	the	usable	soil will	all	be	good	to	go.
Also,	I	figured	it	was	time	to	start	up	a	seed	crop.	I’d	doubled	the	soil enough	that	I	could	afford	to	leave	a	little	corner	of	it	alone.	I	had	12 potatoes	to	work	with.
I	am	one	lucky	son-of-a-bitch	they	aren’t	freeze-dried	or	mulched.
Why	did	NASA	send	12	whole	potatoes,	refrigerated	but	not	frozen?	And why	send	them	along	with	us	as	in-pressure	cargo	rather	than	in	a	crate with	the	rest	of	the	Hab	supplies?	Because	Thanksgiving	was	going	to happen	while	we	were	doing	surface	operations,	and	NASA’s	shrinks thought	it	would	be	good	to	make	a	meal	together.	Not	just	to	eat	it,	but to	actually	prepare	it.	There’s	probably	some	logic	to	that,	but	who	cares?
I	cut	each	potato	in	to	4	pieces,	making	sure	each	piece	had	at	least	2 eyes.	The	eyes	are	where	they	sprout	from.	I	let	them	sit	for	a	few	hours to	harden	a	bit,	then	planted	them,	well	spaced	apart,	in	the	corner.	God speed,	little	taters.	My	life	depends	on	you.
Normally,	it	takes	90	days	to	yield	full	sized	potatoes.	But	I	can’t	wait that	long.	I’ll	need	to	cut	up	all	the	potatoes	from	this	crop	to	seed	the rest	of	the	field.
By	setting	the	Hab	temperature	to	a	balmy	25.5C,	the	plants	will	grow quicker.	Also,	the	internal	lights	will	provide	plenty	of	“sunlight”	and	I’ll make	sure	they	get	lots	of	water	(once	I	figure	out	where	to	get	water). There	will	be	no	foul	weather,	or	any	parasites	to	hassle	them,	or	any weeds	to	compete	with	for	soil	or	nutrients.	With	all	this	going	for	them, they	should	yield	healthy,	sproutable	tubers	within	40	days.
I	figured	that	was	enough	being	Farmer	Mark	for	one	day.
A	full	meal	for	dinner.	I’d	earned	it.	Plus,	I’d	burned	a	ton	of	calories and	I	wanted	them	back.

I	rifled	through	Commander	Lewis’s	stuff	until	I	found	her	personal data-stick.	Everyone	got	to	bring	whatever	digital	entertainment	they wanted,	and	I	was	tired	of	listening	to	Johanssen’s	Beatles	Albums	for now.	Time	to	see	what	Lewis	had.
Crappy	TV	shows.	That’s	what	she	had.	Countless	entire	runs	of	TV shows	from	forever	ago.
Well.	Beggars	can’t	be	choosers.	“Three’s	Company”	it	is.


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	29

Over	the	last	few	days,	I	got	all	the	dirt	in	that	I’d	need.	I	prepped	the tables	and	bunks	for	holding	the	weight	of	soil,	and	even	put	the	dirt	in place.	There’s	still	no	water	to	make	it	viable,	but	I	have	some	ideas.
Really	bad	ideas,	but	they’re	ideas.
Today’s	big	accomplishment	was	setting	up	the	pop-tents.
The	problem	with	the	rovers’	pop-tents	is	they	weren’t	designed	for frequent	use.
The	idea	was	you’d	throw	out	a	pop-tent,	get	in,	and	wait	for	rescue. The	airlock	is	nothing	more	than	valves	and	two	doors.	Equalize	the airlock	with	your	side	of	it,	get	in.	equalize	with	the	other	side,	get	out. This	means	you	lose	a	lot	of	air	each	use.	And	I’ll	need	to	get	in	there	at least	once	a	day.	The	total	volume	of	each	pop	tent	is	pretty	low,	so	I can’t	afford	to	lose	air	from	it.
I	spent	*hours*	trying	to	figure	out	how	to	attach	a	pop-tent	airlock	to a	Hab	airlock.	I	have	three	airlocks	in	the	Hab.	I’d	be	willing	to	dedicate two	to	pop-tents.	That	would	have	been	awesome.
The	frustrating	part	is	pop-tent	airlocks	*can*	attach	to	other airlocks!	You	might	have	injured	people	in	there,	or	not	enough	space suits.	You	need	to	be	able	to	get	people	out	without	exposing	them	to	the Martian	atmosphere.
But	the	pop-tents	were	designed	for	your	crewmates	to	come	rescue you	in	a	*rover*.	The	airlocks	on	the	Hab	are	much	larger	and	completely different	than	the	airlocks	on	the	rovers.	When	you	think	about	it,	there’s really	no	reason	to	attach	a	pop-tent	to	the	Hab.
Unless	you’re	stranded	on	Mars	and	everyone	thinks	you’re	dead	and you’re	in	a	desperate	fight	against	time	and	the	elements	to	stay	alive.
But,	you	know,	other	than	that	edge	case	there’s	no	reason.
So	I	finally	decided	I’d	just	take	the	hit.	I’ll	be	losing	some	air	every time	I	enter	or	exit	a	pop-tent.	The	good	news	is	each	pop-tent	has	an	air feed	valve	on	the	outside.	Remember,	these	are	emergency	shelters.	The occupants	might	need	air,	and	you	can	provide	it	from	a	rover	by	hooking up	an	air	line.	It’s	nothing	more	than	a	tube	that	equalizes	the	rover’s	air with	the	pop-tent’s.
The	Hab	and	the	rovers	use	the	same	valve	and	tubing	standards,	so	I was	able	to	attach	the	pop	tents	directly	to	the	Hab.	That'll	automatically replenish	the	air	I	lose	with	my	entries	and	exits	(what	we	NASA	folk	call ingress	and	egress).
NASA	was	not	....	around	with	these	emergency	tents.	The moment	I
pushed	the	panic	button	in	the	rover,	there	was	an	ear-popping whoosh	as	the	pop-tent	fired	out,	attached	to	the	rover	airlock.	It	took about	two	seconds.
I	closed	the	airlock	from	the	rover	side	and	ended	up	with	a	nice, isolated	pop-tent.	Setting	up	the	equalizer	hose	was	trivial	(for	once	I’m using	equipment	the	way	it	was	designed	to	be	used).	Then,	after	a	few trips	through	the	airlock	(with	the	air-loss	automatically	equalized	by	the Hab)	I	got	the	dirt	in.
I	repeated	the	process	for	the	other	tent.	Everything	went	really easily.
Sigh…	water.
In	high	school,	I	played	a	lot	of	Dungeons	and	Dragons.	(You	may	not have	guessed	this	Botanist	/	Mechanical	Engineer	was	a	bit	of	a	nerd	in high	school,	but	indeed	I	was).	In	the	game	I	played	a	Cleric.	One	of	the magic	spells	I	could	cast	was	“Create	Water”.	I	always	thought	it	was	a really	stupid	spell,	and	it	never	came	up.	Boy	what	I	wouldn’t	give	to	be able	to	do	that	in	real	life	right	now.
Anyway.	That’s	a	problem	for	tomorrow.
For	tonight,	I	have	to	get	back	to	“Three’s	Company.”	I	stopped	last night	in	the	middle	of	the	episode	where	Mr.	Roper	saw	something	and took	it	out	of	context.
LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	30
I	have	an	idiotically	dangerous	plan	for	getting	the	water	I	need.	And boy	do	I	mean	*dangerous*.	But	I	don’t	have	much	choice.	I’m	out	of ideas	and	I’m	due	for	another	dirt-doubling	in	a	few	days.	When	I	do	the final	doubling,	I’ll	be	doubling	on	to	all	that	new	soil	I’ve	brought	in.	If	I don’t	wet	it	first,	it’ll	just	die.
There	isn’t	a	lot	of	water	here	on	Mars.	There’s	ice	at	the	poles,	but they’re	too	far	away.	If	I	want	water	I’ll	have	to	make	it	from	scratch.
Fortunately,	I	know	the	recipe:	Take	hydrogen.	Add	oxygen.	Burn.
Let’s	take	them	one	at	a	time.	I’ll	start	with	oxygen.
I	have	a	fair	bit	of	O2	reserves,	but	not	enough	to	make	250	liters	of water.	Two	high-pressure	tanks	at	one	end	of	the	Hab	are	my	entire supply	(plus	the	air	in	the	Hab	of	course).	They	each	contain	25	liters	of liquid	O2.	The	Hab	would	only	use	them	in	an	emergency;	it	has	the Oxygenator	to	balance	the	atmosphere.	The	reason	the	O2	tanks	are	here is	to	feed	the	spacesuits	and	rovers.
Anyway,	the	reserve	oxygen	would	only	be	enough	to	make	100L	of water	(50L	of	O2	makes	100L	of	molecules	that	only	have	one	O	each). That	would	mean	no	EVAs	for	me,	and	no	emergency	reserves.	And	it would	make	less	than	half	the	water	I	need.	Out	of	the	question.
But	oxygen’s	easier	to	find	on	Mars	than	you	might	think.	The atmosphere	is	98%	CO2.	And	I	happen	to	have	a	machine	whose	sole purpose	is	liberating	oxygen	from	CO2.	Yay	Oxygenator!
One	problem:	The	atmosphere	is	very	thin.	About	1/90th	the	pressure on	Earth.	So	it’s	hard	to	collect.	Getting	air	from	outside	to	inside	is nearly	impossible.	The	whole	purpose	of	the	Hab	is	to	keep	that	sort	of thing	from	happening.	The	tiny	amount	of	Martian	atmosphere	that	enters when	I	use	an	airlock	is	laughable.
That’s	where	the	MAV	fuel	plant	comes	in.
My	crewmates	took	the	MAV	away	weeks	ago.	But	the	bottom	half	of it	stayed	behind.	NASA	is	not	in	the	habit	of	putting	unnecessary	shit	in to	orbit.	It	left	the	landing	gear,	ingress	ramp,	and	fuel	plant	behind.
Remember	how	the	MAV	made	its	own	fuel	with	help	from	the	Martian atmosphere?	Step	one	of	that	is	to	collect	CO2	and	store	it	in	a	high pressure	vessel.	Once	I	get	that	hooked	up	to	the	Hab’s	power,	it’ll	give me	half	a	liter	of	liquid	CO2	per	hour,	indefinitely.	After	5	days	it’ll	have made	125L	of	CO2,	which	will	make	125L	of	O2	after	I	feed	it	through the	Oxygenator.
That’s	enough	to	make	250L	of	water.	So	I	have	a	plan	for	oxygen. The	hydrogen	will	be	a	little	trickier.

I	considered	raiding	the	hydrogen	fuel-cells,	but	I	need	those	batteries to	maintain	power	at	night.	If	I	don’t	have	that,	It’ll	get	too	cold.	I	could bundle	up,	but	the	cold	would	kill	my	crops.	And	each	fuel	cell	only	has	a small	amount	of	H2	anyway.	It’s	just	not	worth	sacrificing	so	much usefulness	for	so	little	gain.	The	one	thing	I	have	going	for	me	is	that energy	is	not	a	problem.	I	don’t	want	to	give	that	up.
So	I’ll	have	to	go	a	different	route.
I	often	talk	about	the	MAV.	But	now	I	want	to	talk	about	the	MDV.
During	the	most	terrifying	23	minutes	of	my	life,	four	of	my crewmates	and	I	tried	not	to	shit	ourselves	while	Martinez	piloted	the
MDV	down	to	the	surface.	It	was	kind	of	like	being	in	a	tumble-dryer.
First,	we	descended	from	Hermes,	and	decelerated	our	orbital	velocity so	we	could	start	falling	properly.	Everything	was	smooth	until	we	hit	the atmosphere.	If	you	think	turbulence	is	rough	in	a	jetliner	going	720kph, just	imagine	what	it’s	like	at	28,000kph.
Several	staged	sets	of	chutes	deployed	automatically	to	slow	our descent,	then	Martinez	manually	piloted	us	to	the	ground,	using	the thrusters	to	slow	descent	and	control	our	lateral	motion.	He’d	trained	for this	for	years,	and	he	did	his	job	extraordinarily	well.	He	exceeded	all plausible	expectations	of	landings,	putting	us	just	nine	meters	from	the target.	The	guy	just	plain	owned	that	landing.
Thanks,	Martinez!	You	may	have	saved	my	life!
Not	because	of	the	perfect	landing,	but	because	he	left	so	much	fuel behind.	Hundreds	of	liters	of	unused	Hydrazine.	Each	molecule	of Hydrazine	has	four	hydrogen	atoms	in	it.	So	each	liter	of	Hydrazine	has enough	hydrogen	for	*two*	liters	of	water.
I	did	a	little	EVA	today	to	check.	The	MDV	has	292L	of	juice	left	in the	tanks.	Enough	to	make	a	almost	600L	of	water!	Way	more	than	I need!
There’s	just	one	catch:	Liberating	hydrogen	from	Hydrazine	is… well…	it's	how	rockets	work.	It’s	really,	really	hot.	And	dangerous.	If	I do	it	in	an	oxygen	atmosphere,	the	heat	and	newly	liberated	hydrogen	will explode.	There’ll	be	a	lot	of	H2O	at	the	end,	but	I’ll	be	too	dead	to appreciate	it.
At	its	root,	Hydrazine	is	pretty	simple.	The	Germans	used	it	as	far back	as	World	War	II	for	rocket-assisted	fighter	fuel	(and	occasionally blew	themselves	up	with	it).
All	you	have	to	do	is	run	it	over	a	catalyst	(which	I	can	extract	from the	MDV	engine)	and	it	will	turn	in	to	nitrogen	and	hydrogen.	I’ll	spare you	the	chemistry,	but	the	end	result	is	that	5	molecules	of	Hydrazine becomes	5	molecules	of	harmless	N2	and	10	molecules	of	lovely	H2. During	this	process,	it	goes	through	an	intermediate	step	of	being ammonia.	Chemistry,	being	the	sloppy	bitch	it	is,	ensures	there’ll	be some	ammonia	that	doesn’t	react	with	the	Hydrazine,	so	it’ll	just	stay ammonia.	You	like	the	smell	of	ammonia?	Well	it’ll	be	prevalent	in	my increasingly	hellish	existence.
The	chemistry	is	on	my	side.	The	question	now	is	how	do	I	actually make	this	reaction	happen	slowly	and	how	do	I	collect	the	hydrogen?	The answer	is:	I	don’t	know.
I	suppose	I’ll	think	of	something.	Or	die.
Anyway,	much	more	important:	I	simply	can’t	abide	the	replacement of	Chrissie	with	Cindy.	“Three’s	Company”	may	never	be	the	same	after this	fiasco.	Time	will	tell.



Chapter	4

LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	32

So	I	ran	in	to	a	bunch	of	problems	with	my	water	plan.
My	idea	is	to	make	600L	of	water	(limited	by	the	hydrogen	I	can	get from	the	Hydrazine).	That	means	I’ll	need	300L	of	liquid	O2.
I	can	create	the	O2	easily	enough.	It	takes	20	hours	for	the	MAV	fuel plant	to	fill	its	10L	tank	with	CO2.	The	Oxygenator	can	turn	it	in	to	O2, then	the	Atmospheric	Regulator	will	see	the	O2	content	in	the	Hab	is high,	and	pull	it	out	of	the	air,	storing	it	in	the	main	O2	tanks.	They’d	fill up,	so	I’d	have	to	transfer	O2	over	to	the	rovers’	tanks	and	even	space suit	tanks	as	necessary.
But	I	can’t	create	it	very	quickly.	At	1/2L	of	CO2	per	hour,	it	will take	25	days	to	make	the	oxygen	I	need.	That’s	longer	than	I’d	like.
Also,	there’s	the	problem	of	storing	the	hydrogen.	The	air	tanks	of	the Hab,	the	rovers,	and	all	the	space	suits	add	up	to	exactly	374L	of	storage. To	hold	all	the	materials	for	water,	I	would	need	a	whopping	900L	of storage.
I	considered	using	one	of	the	rovers	as	a	“tank”.	It	would	certainly	be big	enough,	but	it	just	isn’t	designed	to	hold	in	that	much	pressure.	It’s made	to	hold	(you	guessed	it)	one	atmosphere.	I	need	vessels	that	can hold	50	times	that	much.	I’m	sure	a	rover	would	burst.
The	best	way	to	store	the	ingredients	of	water	is	to	make	them	be water.	So	what’s	what	I’ll	have	to	do.

The	concept	is	simple,	but	the	execution	will	be	incredibly	dangerous.
Every	20	hours,	I’ll	have	10L	of	CO2	thanks	to	the	MAV	fuel	plant. I’ll	vent	it	in	to	the	Hab	via	the	highly	scientific	method	of		detaching	the tank	from	the	MAV	landing	struts,	bringing	it	in	to	the	Hab,	then	opening the	valve	until	it’s	empty.
The	Oxygenator	will	turn	it	in	to	oxygen	in	its	own	time.
Then,	I’ll	release	Hydrazine,	VERY	SLOWLY,	over	the	iridium
catalyst,	to	turn	it	in	to	N2	and	H2.	I’ll	direct	the	hydrogen	to	a	small	area and	burn	it.
As	you	can	see,	this	plan	provides	many	opportunities	for	me	to	die	in a	fiery	explosion.
Firstly,	Hydrazine	is	some	serious	death.	If	I	make	any	mistakes, there’ll	be	nothing	left	but	the	“Mark	Watney	Memorial	Crater”	where the	Hab	once	stood.
Presuming	I	don’t	....	up	with	the	Hydrazine,	there’s	still	the	matter of	burning	hydrogen.	I’m	going	to	be	setting	a	fire.	In	the	Hab.	On purpose.
If	you	asked	every	engineer	at	NASA	what	the	worst	scenario	for	the Hab	was,	they’d	all	answer	“fire.”	If	you	asked	them	what	the	result would	be,	they’d	answer	“death	by	fire.”
But	if	I	can	pull	it	off,	I’ll	be	making	water	continuously,	with	no need	to	store	hydrogen	or	oxygen.	It’ll	be	mixed	in	to	the	atmosphere	as humidity,	but	the	Water	Reclaimer	will	pull	it	out.
I	don’t	even	have	to	perfectly	match	the	Hydrazine	end	of	it	with	the fuel	plant	CO2	part.	There’s	plenty	of	oxygen	in	the	Hab,	and	plenty	more in	reserve.	I	just	need	to	make	sure	not	to	make	so	much	water	I	run myself	out	of	O2.
I	hooked	up	the	MAV	fuel	plant	to	the	Hab’s	power	supply. Fortunately	they	both	use	the	same	voltage.	It’s	chugging	away, collecting	CO2	for	me.
Half-ration	for	dinner.	All	I	accomplished	today	was	thinking	up	a plan	that’ll	kill	me,	and	that	doesn’t	take	much	energy.
I’m	going	to	finish	off	the	last	of	“Three’s	Company”	tonight.
Frankly,	I	like	Mr.	Furley	more	than	the	Ropers.
LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	33
This	may	be	my	last	entry.
I’ve	known	since	Sol	6	there	was	a	good	chance	I’d	die	here.	But	I figured	it	would	be	when	I	ran	out	of	food.	I	didn’t	think	it	would	be	this early.
I’m	about	the	fire	up	the	Hydrazine.
Our	mission	was	designed	knowing	that	anything	might	need maintenance,	so	I	have	plenty	of	tools.	Even	in	a	space-suit,	I	was	able	to pry	the	access	panels	off	the	MDV	and	get	at	the	six	Hydrazine	tanks.	I set	them	in	the	shadow	of	a	rover	to	keep	them	from	heating	up	too	much. There’s	more	shade	and	a	cooler	temperature	near	the	Hab,	but	....	that. If	they’re	going	to	blow	up,	they	can	blow	up	a	rover,	not	my	house.
Then	I	pried	out	the	reaction	chamber.	It	took	some	work	and	I cracked	the	damn	thing	in	half,	but	I	got	it	out.	Lucky	for	me	I	don’t	need a	proper	fuel	reaction.	In	fact,	I	really,	super-duper	don’t	want	a	proper fuel	reaction.
I	brought	all	the	Hydrazine	and	reaction	chamber	in.	I	briefly considered	only	having	one	tank	in	at	a	time	to	reduce	risk.	But	some back-of-the-napkin	math	told	me	even	one	tank	was	enough	to	blow	the whole	Hab	up,	so	why	not	bring	them	all	in?
The	tanks	have	manual	vent	valves.	I’m	not	100%	sure	what	they’re for.	Certainly	we	were	never	expected	to	use	them.	I	think	they’re	there	to release	pressure	during	the	many	quality	checks	done	during	construction and	before	fueling.	Whatever	the	reason,	I	have	valves	to	work	with.	All it	takes	is	a	wrench.
I	liberated	a	spare	water	hose	from	the	Water	Reclaimer.	With	some thread	torn	out	of	a	uniform	(Sorry,	Johanssen),	I	attached	it	to	the	valve output.	Hydrazine	is	a	liquid,	so	all	I	have	to	do	is	lead	it	to	the	reaction chamber	(more	of	a	“reaction	bowl”	now).
Meanwhile,	the	MAV	fuel	plant	is	still	working.	I’ve	already	brought in	one	tank	of	CO2,	vented	it,	and	returned	it	for	refilling.
So	there	are	no	more	excuses.	It’s	time	to	start	making	water.
If	you	find	the	charred	remains	of	the	Hab,	it	means	I	did	something wrong.	I’m	copying	this	log	over	to	both	rovers	so	it’s	more	likely	it’ll survive.
Here	goes	nothin’
LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	33	(2)

Well,	I	didn’t	die.
First	thing	I	did	was	put	on	the	inner	lining	of	my	EVA	suit.	Not	the bulky	suit	itself,	just	the	inner	clothing	I	wear	under	it,	including	the gloves	and	booties.	Then	I	got	an	oxygen	mask	from	the	medical	supplies and	some	lab	goggles	from	Vogel's	chem	kit.	Almost	all	of	my	body	was now	protected	and	I	would	be	breathing	canned	air.
Why?	Because		Hydrazine	is	very	toxic.	If	I	breathe	too	much	of	it	I'll get	major	lung	problems.	If	I	get	it	on	my	skin,	I'll	have	chemical	burns for	the	rest	of	my	life.	I	wasn't	taking	any	chances.
I	turned	the	valve	until	a	trickle	of	Hydrazine	came	out.	I	let	one	drop fall	in	to	the	iridium	bowl.
It	un-dramatically	sizzled	and	disappeared.
But	hey,	that’s	what	I	wanted.	I	just	freed	up	hydrogen	and	nitrogen.
Yay!
One	thing	I	have	in	abundance	here	is	bags.	They’re	not	much different	than	kitchen	trash	bags,	though	I’m	sure	they	cost	$50,000 because	NASA.
In	addition	to	being	our	commander,	Lewis	was	also	the	geologist. She	was	going	to	collect	rock	and	soil	samples	from	all	over	the operational	area	(10	km	radius).	Weight	limits	restricted	how	much	she could	actually	bring	back,	so	she	was	going	to	collect	first,	then	sort	out the	most	interesting	50kg	to	take	home.	The	bags	are	to	store	and	tag	the samples.	Some	are	smaller	than	a	Ziploc,	while	others	are	as	big	as	a Hefty	lawn	and	leaf	bag.
Also,	I	have	duct	tape.	Ordinary	duct	tape,	like	you	buy	at	a	hardware store.	Turns	out	even	NASA	can’t	improve	on	duct	tape.
I	cut	up	a	few	Hefty	sized	bags	and	taped	them	together	to	make	a	sort of	tent.	Really	it	was	more	of	a	super-sized	bag.	I	was	able	to	cover	the whole	table	where	my	Hydrazine	mad	scientist	set-up	was.	I	put	a	few knickknacks	on	the	table	to	keep	the	plastic	out	of	the	iridium	bowl.
Thankfully,	the	bags	are	clear,	so	I	can	still	see	what’s	going	on.
Next,	I	sacrificed	a	spacesuit	to	the	cause.	I	needed	an	air	hose.	I	have
a	surplus	of	space	suits,	after	all.	A	total	of	seven;	one	for	each crewmember	and	one	spare.	So	I	don’t	mind	murdering	one	of	them.
I	cut	a	hole	in	the	top	of	the	plastic	and	duct	taped	the	hose	in	place.
Nice	seal,	I	think.
With	some	more	string	from	Johannsen’s	clothing,	I	hung	the	other end	of	the	hose	from	the	top	of	the	Hab's	dome	by	two	angled	threads	(to keep	them	well	clear	of	the	hose	opening).	Now	I	had	a	little	chimney.
The	hose	was	about	1cm	wide.	Hopefully	a	good	aperture.
The	hydrogen	will	be	hot	after	the	reaction,	and	it'll	want	to	go	up.	So I’ll	let	it	go	up	the	chimney,	then	burn	it	as	it	comes	out.
Then	I	had	to	invent	fire.
NASA	put	a	lot	of	effort	in	to	making	sure	nothing	here	can	burn. Everything	is	made	of	metal	or	flame	retardant	plastic	and	the	uniforms are	synthetic.	I	needed	something	that	could	hold	a	flame,	some	kind	of pilot	light.	I	don't	have	the	skills	to	keep	enough	H2	flowing	to	feed	a flame	without	killing	myself.	Too	narrow	a	margin	there.
After	a	search	of	everyone’s	personal	items	(hey,	if	they	wanted privacy,	they	shouldn’t	have	abandoned	me	on	Mars	with	their	stuff)	I found	my	answer.
Martinez	is	a	devout	catholic.	I	knew	that.	What	I	didn’t	know	was	he brought	along	a	small	wooden	cross.	I’m	sure	NASA	gave	him	shit	about it,	but	I	also	know	Martinez	is	one	stubborn	son-of-a-bitch.
I	chipped	his	sacred	religious	item	into	long	splinters	using	a	pair	of pliers	and	a	screwdriver.	I	figure	if	there’s	a	God,	He	won’t	mind, considering	the	situation	I’m	in.
Ruining	the	only	religious	icon	I	have	leaves	me	vulnerable	to	Mars Vampires.	I’ll	have	to	risk	it.
There	were	plenty	of	wires	and	batteries	around	to	make	a	spark.	But you	can’t	just	ignite	wood	with	a	small	electric	spark.	So	I	collected ribbons	of	bark	from	local	palm	trees,	then	got	a	couple	of	sticks	and rubbed	them	together	to	create	enough	friction	to…
No	not	really.	I	vented	pure	oxygen	at	the	stick	and	gave	it	a	spark. ....	lit	up	like	a	match.
With	my	mini-torch	in	hand,	I	started	a	slow	Hydrazine	flow.	It
sizzled	on	the	iridium	and	disappeared.	Soon	I	had	short	bursts	of	flame sputtering	from	the	chimney.
The	main	thing	I	had	watch	was	the	temperature.	Hydrazine	breaking down	is	extremely	exothermic.	So	I’d	do	it	a	bit	at	a	time,	constantly watching	the	readout	of	a	thermocouple	I’d	attached	to	the	iridium chamber.
Point	is,	the	process	worked!
Each	Hydrazine	tank	holds	a	little	over	50L,	which	would	be	enough to	make	100L	of	water.	I’m	limited	by	my	oxygen	production,	but	I’m	all excited	now,	so	I'm	willing	to	use	half	my	reserves.	Long	story	short,	I’ll stop	when	the	tank	is	half-empty,	and	I’ll	have	50L	or	water	at	the	end!


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	34

Well	that	took	a	really	long	time.	I’ve	been	at	it	all	night	with	the Hydrazine.	But	I	got	the	job	done.
I	could	have	finished	faster,	but	I	figured	caution’s	best	when	setting fire	to	rocket	fuel	in	an	enclosed	space.
Boy	is	this	place	a	tropical	jungle	now,	I’ll	tell	ya.
It’s	almost	30C	in	here,	and	humid	as	all	hell.	I	just	dumped	a	ton	of heat	and	50L	of	water	in	to	the	air.
During	this	process,	the	poor	Hab	had	to	be	the	mother	of	a	messy toddler.	It’s	been	replacing	the	oxygen	I’ve	used,	and	the	Water
Reclaimer	is	trying	to	get	the	humidity	down	to	sane	levels.	Nothing	to	be done	about	the	heat.	There’s	actually	no	air-conditioning	in	the	Hab. Mars	is	cold.	Getting	rid	of	excess	heat	isn’t	something	we	expected	to deal	with.
I’ve	now	grown	accustomed	to	the	alarms	that	are	blaring	at	all	times. The	fire	alarm	has	finally	stopped,	now	that	there’s	no	more	fire.	The	low oxygen	alarm	should	stop	soon.	The	high	humidity	alarm	will	take	a	little longer.	The	Water	Reclaimer	has	its	work	cut	out	for	it	today.
For	a	moment,	there	yet	another	alarm.	The	Water	Reclaimer’s	main tank	was	full.	Booyah!	That’s	the	kind	of	problem	I	want	to	have!
Remember	the	spacesuit	I	vandalized	yesterday?	I	hung	it	on	its	rack and	carried	buckets	of	water	to	it	from	the	reclaimer.	It	can	hold	an atmosphere	of	air	in.	It	should	be	able	to	handle	a	few	buckets	of	water.
Man	I’m	tired.	Been	up	all	night	and	it’s	time	to	sleep.	But	I’ll	drift off	to	dreamland	in	the	best	mood	I’ve	been	in	since	Sol	6.
Things	are	finally	going	my	way.	In	fact,	they’re	going	great!	I	have	a chance	to	live	after	all!
LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	37
I	am	....	and	I’m	gonna	die!
Ok,	calm	down.	I’m	sure	I	can	get	around	this.
I’m	writing	this	log	to	you,	dear	future	Mars	archeologist,	from	Rover 2. You	may	wonder	why	I’m	not	in	the	Hab	right	now.	Because	I	fled	in terror,	that’s	why!	And	I’m	not	sure	what	the	hell	to	do	next.
I	guess	I	should	explain	what	happened.	If	this	is	my	last	entry,	you’ll at	least	know	why.
Over	the	past	few	days,	I've	been	happily	making	water.	It’s	been going	swimmingly.	(See	what	I	did	there?	“swimmingly”)
I	even	beefed	up	the	MAV	fuel	plant	compressor.	It	was	very technical	(I	increased	the	voltage	to	the	pump).	So	I’m	making	water even	faster	now.
After	my	initial	burst	of	50L,	I	decided	to	settle	down	and	just	make	it at	the	rate	I	get	O2.	I’m	not	willing	to	go	below	a	25L	reserve.	So	when	I dip	too	low,	I	stop	dicking	with	Hydrazine	until	I	get	the	O2	back	up	to well	above	25L.
Important	note:	When	I	say	I	made	50L	of	water,	that	was	an assumption.	I	didn’t	*reclaim*	50L	of	water.	The	additional	soil	I’d	filled the	Hab	with	was	extremely	dry	and	greedily	sucked	up	a	lot	of	the humidity.	That’s	where	I	want	the	water	to	go	anyway,	so	I’m	not worried,	and	I	wasn’t	surprised	when	the	reclaimer	didn’t	get	anywhere near	50L.
I	get	10L	of	CO2	every	15	hours	now	that	I	souped	up	the	pump.	I’ve
done	this	process	four	times.	My	math	tells	me	that,	including	my	initial 50L	burst,	I	should	have	130L	of	water	added	to	the	system.
Well	my	math	is	a	damn	liar!
I’ve	gained	70L	in	the	water	regulator	and	the	spacesuit-nowwatertank.	There’s	plenty	of	condensation	on	the	walls	and	domed	roof, and	the	soil	is	certainly	absorbing	its	fair	share.	But	that	doesn’t	account for	60L	of	missing	water.	Something	was	wrong.
That’s	when	I	noticed	the	other	O2	tank.
The	Hab	has	two	reserve	O2	tanks.	One	on	each	side	of	the	structure, for	safety	reasons.	The	Hab	can	decide	which	one	to	use	whenever	it wants.	Turns	out	it’s	been	topping	off	the	atmosphere	from	Tank	1.	But when	I	add	O2	to	the	system	(via	the	Oxygenator),	the	Hab	evenly distributes	the	gain	among	the	two	tanks.	Tank	2	has	been	slowly	gaining oxygen.
That’s	not	a	problem,	it’s	just	doing	its	job.	But	it	does	mean	I’ve been	gaining	O2	over	time.	Which	means	I’m	not	consuming	it	as	fast	as I	thought.
At	first,	I	thought	“Yay!	More	oxygen!	Now	I	can	make	water	faster!” But	then	a	more	disturbing	thought	occurred	to	me.
Follow	my	logic:	I’m	gaining	O2.	But	the	amount	I’m	bringing	in from	outside	is	constant.	So	the	only	way	to	“gain”	it	is	to	be	using	less than	I	thought.	But	I’ve	been	doing	the	Hydrazine	reaction	with	the assumption	that	I	was	using	all	of	it.
The	only	possible	explanation	is	I	haven’t	been	burning	all	the released	hydrogen.
It’s	obvious	now,	in	retrospect.	But	it	never	occurred	to	me	that	some of	the	hydrogen	just	wouldn’t	burn.	It	got	past	the	flame,	and	went	on	its merry	way.	Dammit,	Jim,	I’m	a	botanist,	not	a	chemist!
Chemistry	is	messy,	so	there's	unburned	Hydrogen	in	the	air.	All around	me.	Mixed	in	with	the	oxygen.	Just...	hanging	out.	Waiting	for	a spark	so	it	can	blow	the	....	Hab	up!
Once	I	figured	this	out,	and	composed	myself,	I	got	a	Ziploc-sized sample	bag	and	waved	it	around	a	bit,	then	sealed	it.
Then,	a	quick	EVA	to	a	rover,	where	we	keep	the	atmospheric
analyzers.	Nitrogen:	22%.	Oxygen:	9%.	Hydrogen:	64%.
I’ve	been	hiding	here	in	the	rover	ever	since.
It’s	Hydrogenville	in	the	Hab.
I’m	very	lucky	it	hasn’t	blown.	Even	a	small	static	discharge	would have	led	to	“Oh	the	humanity!”
So,	I’m	here	in	Rover	2.	I	can	stay	for	a	day	or	two,	tops,	before	the CO2	filters	from	the	rover	and	my	spacesuit	fill	up.	I	have	that	long	to figure	out	how	to	deal	with	this.
The	Hab	is	now	a	bomb. 
Chapter	5

LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	38

I’m	still	cowering	in	the	rover,	but	I’ve	had	time	to	think.	And	I	know how	to	deal	with	the	hydrogen.
I	thought	about	the	Atmospheric	Regulator.	It	pays	attention	to	what’s in	the	air	and	balances	it.	That’s	how	the	excess	O2	I've	been	importing ends	up	in	the	tanks.	Problem	is,	it’s	just	not	built	to	pull	hydrogen	out	of the	air.
The	regulator	uses	freeze-separation	to	sort	out	the	gasses.	When	it decides	there’s	too	much	oxygen,	it	starts	collecting	air	in	a	tank	and cooling	it	to	90	kelvin.	That	makes	the	oxygen	turn	to	liquid,	but	leaves the	nitrogen	(condensation	point:	77K)	still	gaseous.	Then	it	stores	the O2.
But	I	can’t	get	it	to	do	that	for	hydrogen,	because	hydrogen	needs	to be	below	21K	to	turn	liquid.	And	the	regulator	just	can’t	get	temperatures that	low.	Dead	end.
Here’s	the	solution:
Hydrogen	is	dangerous	because	it	can	blow	up.	But	it	can	only	blow up	if	there’s	oxygen	around.	Hydrogen	without	oxygen	is	harmless.	And the	regulator	is	all	about	pulling	oxygen	out	of	the	air.
There	are	four	different	safety	interlocks	that	prevent	the	regulator from	letting	the	Hab’s	oxygen	content	get	too	low.	But	they’re	designed to	work	against	technical	faults,	not	deliberate	sabotage	(bwa	ha	ha!).
Long	story	short,	I	can	trick	the	regulator	in	to	pulling	all	the	oxygen out	of	the	Hab.	Then	I	can	wear	a	spacesuit	(so	I	can	breathe)	and	do whatever	I	want	without	fear	of	blowing	up.	Yay!
I’ll	use	an	O2	tank	to	spray	short	bursts	of	oxygen	at	the	hydrogen, and	make	a	spark	with	a	couple	of	wires	and	a	battery.	It’ll	set	the hydrogen	on	fire,	but	only	until	the	small	bit	of	oxygen	is	used	up.
I’ll	just	do	that	over	and	over,	in	controlled	bursts,	until	I’ve	burned off	all	the	hydrogen.
One	tiny	flaw	with	that	plan:	It’ll	kill	my	dirt.
The	dirt	is	only	viable	soil	because	of	the	bacteria	growing	in	it.	If	I get	rid	of	all	the	oxygen,	the	bacteria	will	die.	I	don’t	have	100	billion little	spacesuits	handy.
It’s	half	a	solution	anyway.
Time	to	take	a	break	from	thinking.
Commander	Lewis	was	the	last	one	to	use	this	rover.	She	was scheduled	to	use	it	again	on	Sol	7,	but	she	went	home	instead.	Her personal	travel	kit’s	still	in	the	back.	Rifling	through	it,	I	found	a	protein bar	and	a	personal	USB,	probably	full	of	music	to	listen	to	on	the	drive.
Time	to	chow	down	and	see	what	the	good	Commander	brought	along for	music.

LOG	ENTRY	SOL	38	(2)
Disco.	God	damn	it,	Lewis.


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	39

Well	I	think	I’ve	got	it.
Soil	bacteria	are	used	to	winters.	They	get	less	active,	and	require	less oxygen	to	survive.	I	can	lower	the	Hab	temperature	to	1C,	and	they’ll nearly	hibernate.	This	sort	of	thing	happens	on	Earth	all	the	time.	They can	survive	a	couple	of	days	this	way.	If	you’re	wondering	how	bacteria survive	long	periods	of	cold	on	Earth,	the	answer	is	they	don’t.	Bacteria further	underground	where	it	was	warmer	breed	upward	to	replace	the dead	ones.
They’ll	still	need	some	oxygen,	but	not	much.	I	think	a	1%	content will	do	the	trick.	That	leaves	a	little	in	the	air	for	the	bacteria	to	breathe, but	not	enough	to	maintain	a	fire.	So	the	hydrogen	won’t	blow	up.
But	that	leads	to	yet	another	problem.	The	potato	plants	won’t	like	the plan.
They	don’t	mind	the	lack	of	oxygen	but	the	cold	will	kill	them.	So	I’ll have	to	pot	them	(bag	them,	actually)	and	move	them	to	a	rover.	They haven’t	even	sprouted	yet,	so	it’s	not	like	they	need	light.
It	was	surprisingly	annoying	to	find	a	way	to	make	the	heat	stay	on when	the	rover’s	unoccupied.	But	I	figured	it	out.	After	all,	I’ve	got nothing	but	time	in	here.

So	that’s	the	plan.	First,	bag	the	potato	plants	and	bring	them	to	the rover	(make	sure	it	keeps	the	damn	heater	on).	Then	drop	the	Hab temperature	to	1C.	Then	reduce	to	O2	content	to	1%.	Then	burn	off	the hydrogen	with	a	battery,	some	wires,	and	a	tank	of	O2.
Yeah.	This	all	sounds	like	a	great	idea	with	no	chance	of	catastrophic failure.
That	was	sarcasm,	by	the	way.
Well,	off	I	go.


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	40

Things	weren’t	100%	successful.
They	say	no	plan	survives	first	contact	with	implementation.	I’d	have to	agree.	Here’s	what	happened:
I	summoned	up	the	courage	to	return	to	the	Hab.	Once	I	got	there,	I felt	a	little	more	confident.	Everything	was	how	I’d	left	it	(what	did	I expect?	Martians	looting	my	stuff?)
It	would	take	a	while	to	let	the	Hab	cool,	so	I	started	that	right	away by	turning	the	temperature	down	to	1C.
I	bagged	the	potato	plants,	and	got	a	chance	to	check	up	on	them while	I	was	at	it.	They’re	rooting	nicely	and	about	to	sprout.	One	thing	I hadn’t	accounted	for	was	how	to	bring	them	from	the	Hab	to	the	rovers.
The	answer	was	pretty	easy.	I	put	all	of	them	in	Martinez’s	spacesuit. Then	I	dragged	it	out	with	me	to	the	rover	I’d	set	up	as	a	temporary nursery.
Making	sure	to	jimmy	the	heater	to	stay	on,	I	headed	back	to	the	Hab.
Buy	the	time	I	got	back,	it	was	already	chilly.	Down	to	5C	already.
Shivering	and	seeing	my	breath	condense	in	front	of	me,	I	threw	on	extra layers	of	clothes.	Fortunately	I’m	not	a	very	big	man.	Martinez’s	clothes fit	over	mine,	and	Vogel’s	fit	over	Martinez’s.	These	shitty	clothes	were designed	to	be	worn	in	a	temperature-controlled	environment.	Even	with three	layers,	I	was	still	cold.	I	climbed	in	to	my	bunk	and	under	the covers	for	more	warmth.
Once	the	temperature	got	to	1C,	I	waited	another	hour,	just	to	make sure	the	bacteria	in	the	dirt	got	the	memo	that	it	was	time	to	take	it	slow.
The	next	problem	I	ran	in	to	was	the	regulator.	Despite	my swaggering	confidence,	I	wasn’t	able	to	outwit	it.	It	really	does	not	want to	pull	too	much	O2	out	of	the	air.	The	lowest	I	could	get	it	to	was	15%. After	that,	it	flatly	refused	to	go	lower,	and	nothing	I	did	mattered.	I	had all	these	plans	about	getting	in	and	reprogramming	it.	But	the	safety protocols	turned	out	to	be	in	ROMs.
I	can’t	blame	it.	Its	whole	purpose	is	to	prevent	the	atmosphere	from becoming	lethal.	Nobody	at	NASA	thought	“Hey,	let’s	allow	a	fatal	lack of	oxygen	that	will	make	everyone	drop	dead!”
So	I	had	to	use	more	a	more	primitive	plan.
The	regulator	uses	a	different	set	of	vents	for	air	sampling	than	it does	for	main	air	separation.	The	air	that	gets	freeze-separated	comes	in through	a	single	large	vent	on	the	main	unit.	But	it	samples	the	air	from nine	small	vents	that	pipe	back	to	the	main	unit.	That	way	it	gets	a	good average	of	the	Hab,	and	prevents	one	localized	imbalance	from	throwing it	off.
I	taped	up	eight	of	the	intakes,	leaving	only	one	of	them	active.	Then	I taped	the	mouth	of	a	Hefty-sized	bag	over	the	neck-hole	of	a	spacesuit (Johanssen’s	this	time).	In	the	back	of	the	bag,	I	poked	a	small	hole	and taped	it	over	the	remaining	intake.
Then	I	inflated	the	bag	with	pure	O2	from	the	suit’s	tanks.	“Holy shit!”	the	regulator	thought,	“I	better	pull	O2	out	right	away!” Worked	great!
I	decided	I	not	to	wear	a	space	suit	after	all.	The	atmospheric	pressure was	going	to	be	fine.	All	I	needed	was	oxygen.	So	I	grabbed	an	O2 canister	from	the	medical	bay.	That	way,	I	had	a	hell	of	a	lot	more freedom	of	motion.	It	even	had	a	rubber	band	to	keep	it	on	my	face!
Though	I	did	need	a	spacesuit	to	monitor	the	actual	Hab	oxygen	level (The	Hab’s	main	computer	was	convinced	it	was	100%	O2).	Each spacesuit	knew	how	to	monitor	its	own	internal	air,	of	course.
Let’s	see…	Martinez’s	spacesuit	was	in	the	rover.	Johanssen’s	was outwitting	the	regulator.	Lewis’s	was	serving	as	a	water-tank.	I	didn’t want	to	mess	with	mine	(hey,	it’s	custom	fitted!).	That	left	me	three spacesuits	to	work	with.
I	grabbed	Vogel’s	suit	and	activated	the	internal	air	sensors	while leaving	the	helmet	off.	Once	the	oxygen	dropped	to	12%	I	put	the breather	mask	on.	I	watched	it	fall	further	and	further.	When	it	reached 1%	I	cut	power	to	the	regulator.
I	may	not	be	able	to	reprogram	the	regulator,	but	I	can	turn	the bastard	off	completely.
The	Hab	has	emergency	flashlights	in	many	locations	in	case	of critical	power	failure.	I	tore	the	L.E.D.	bulbs	out	of	one	and	left	the	two frayed	power	wires	very	close	together.	Now	when	I	turned	it	on	I	got	a small	spark.
Taking	a	canister	of	O2	from	Vogel’s	suit,	I	attached	a	strap	to	both ends	and	slung	it	over	my	shoulder.	Then	I	attached	an	air	line	to	the	tank and	crimped	it	with	my	thumb.	I	turned	on	a	very	slow	trickle	of	O2;	a small	enough	that	it	couldn’t	overpower	the	crimp.
Standing	on	the	table	with	a	sparker	in	one	hand	and	my	oxygen	line in	the	other,	I	reached	up	and	gave	it	a	try.
And	holy	hell	it	worked!	Blowing	the	O2	over	the	sparker,	I	flicked the	switch	on	the	flashlight	and	a	wonderful	jet	of	flame	fired	out	of	the tube.	The	fire	alarm	went	off,	of	course.	But	I’d	heard	it	so	much	lately	I barely	noticed	it	any	more.
Then	I	did	it	again.	And	again.	Short	bursts.	Nothing	flashy.	I	was happy	to	take	my	time.
I	was	elated!	This	was	the	best	plan	ever!	Not	only	was	I	clearing	out the	hydrogen,	I	was	making	more	water!
Everything	went	great	right	up	to	the	explosion.

One	minute	I	was	happily	burning	hydrogen;	the	next	I	was	on	the
other	side	of	the	Hab	and	a	lot	of	stuff	was	knocked	over.	I	stumbled	to my	feet	and	saw	the	Hab	in	disarray.
My	first	thought	was	“My	ears	hurt	like	hell!”
Then	I	thought	“I’m	dizzy,”	and	fell	to	my	knees.	Then	I	fell	prone.	I was	that	dizzy.	I	groped	my	head	with	both	hands,	looking	for	a	headwound	I	desperately	hoped	would	not	be	there.	Nothing	seemed	to	be amiss.
But	feeling	all	over	my	head	and	face	revealed	the	true	problem.	My oxygen	mask	had	been	ripped	off	in	the	blast.	I	was	breathing	nearly	pure nitrogen.
The	floor	was	covered	in	junk	from	all	over	the	Hab.	No	hope	of finding	the	medical	O2	tank.	No	hope	of	finding	anything	in	this	mess before	I	passed	out.
Then	I	saw	Lewis’s	suit	hanging	right	where	it	belonged.	It	hadn’t moved	in	the	blast.	It	was	heavy	to	start	with	and	had	70L	of	water	in	it.
Rushing	over,	I	quickly	cranked	on	the	O2	and	stuck	my	head	into	the neck-hole	(I’d	removed	the	helmet	long	ago,	for	easy	access	to	the water).	I	breathed	a	bit	until	the	dizziness	faded,	then	took	a	deep	breath and	held	it.
Still	holding	my	breath,	I	glanced	over	to	the	spacesuit	and	Hefty	bag I’d	used	to	outsmart	the	regulator.	The	bad	news	is	I’d	never	removed them.	The	good	news	is	the	explosion	removed	them.	Eight	of	the	nine intakes	for	the	regulator	were	still	bagged,	but	this	one	would	at	least	tell the	truth.
Stumbling	over	to	the	regulator,	I	turned	it	back	on.
After	a	two	second	boot	process	(it	was	made	to	start	up	fast	for obvious	reasons)	it	immediately	identified	the	problem.
The	shrill	low-oxygen	alarm	blared	throughout	the	Hab	as	the regulator	dumped	pure	oxygen	in	to	the	atmosphere	as	fast	as	it	safely could.	Separating	oxygen	from	the	atmosphere	is	difficult	and	time consuming,	but	adding	it	is	as	simple	as	opening	a	valve.
I	clambered	over	debris	back	to	Lewis’s	spacesuit	and	put	my	head back	in	for	more	good	air.	Within	three	minutes,	the	regulator	had brought	the	Hab	oxygen	back	up	to	par.
I	noticed	for	the	first	time	how	burned	my	clothing	was.	It	was	a	good time	to	be	wearing	three	layers	of	clothes.	Mostly	the	damage	was	on	my sleves.	The	outer	layer	was	gone.	The	middle	layer	was	singed	and	burned clean	through	in	places.	The	inner	layer,	my	own	uniform,	was	in reasonably	good	shape.	Looks	like	I	lucked	out	again.
Also,	glancing	at	the	Hab’s	main	computer,	I	see	the	temperature	rose to	15C.	Something	very	hot	and	very	explodey	happened,	and	I	wasn’t sure	what.	Or	how.
And	that’s	where	I	am	now.	Wondering	what	the	hell	happened.
After	all	that	work	and	getting	blown	up,	I’m	exhausted.	Tomorrow I’ll	have	to	do	a	million	equipment	checks	and	try	to	figure	out	what	blew up,	but	for	now	I	just	want	to	sleep.
I’m	in	the	rover	again	tonight.	Even	with	the	hydrogen	gone,	I’m reluctant	to	hang	out	in	a	Hab	that	has	a	history	of	exploding	for	no reason.	Plus,	I	can’t	be	sure	there	isn’t	a	leak.
This	time,	I	brought	a	proper	meal,	and	something	to	listen	to	that isn’t	disco.


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	41

I	spent	the	day	running	full	diagnostics	on	every	system	in	the	Hab.	It was	incredibly	boring,	but	my	survival	depends	on	these	machines,	so	it had	to	be	done.	I	can’t	just	assume	an	explosion	did	no	long-term damage.
I	did	the	most	critical	tests	first.	Number	one	was	the	integrity	of	the Hab	canvas.	I	felt	pretty	confident	it	was	in	good	shape,	cause	I’d	spent	a few	hours	asleep	in	the	rover	before	returning	to	the	Hab,	and	the pressure	was	still	good.	The	computer	reported	no	change	pressure	over that	time,	other	than	a	minor	fluctuation	based	on	temperature.
Then	I	checked	the	Oxygenator.	If	that	stops	working	and	I	can’t	fix it,	I’m	a	dead	man.	No	problems.
Then	the	Atmospheric	Regulator.	Again,	no	problem.
Heating	unit,	primary	battery	array,	O2	and	N2	storage	tanks,	Water Reclaimer,	all	three	airlocks,	lighting	systems,	main	computer…	on	and on	I	went,	feeling	better	and	better	as	each	system	proved	to	be	in	perfect working	order.
Got	to	hand	it	to	NASA.	They	don’t	....	around	when	making	this stuff.
Then	came	the	critical	part…	checking	the	dirt.	Taking	a	few	samples from	all	over	the	Hab	(remember,	it’s	all	dirt	flooring	now),	I	made	some slides.
I	took	them	over	to	the	microscope	and	checked	up	on	my	beloved bacteria.	I	breathed	a	sigh	of	relief	when	I	saw	healthy,	active	bacteria doing	their	thing.
Then	I	set	about	cleaning	up	the	mess.	And	I	had	a	lot	of	time	to	think about	what	had	happened.
So	what	happened?	Well,	I	have	a	theory.
According	to	the	main	computer,	during	the	blast,	the	internal pressure	spiked	to	1.4	atmospheres,	and	the	temperature	rose	to	15C	in under	a	second.	But	the	pressure	quickly	subsided	back	to	1atm.	This would	make	sense	if	the	Atmospheric	Regulator	were	on,	but	I’d	cut power	to	it.
The	temperature	remained	15C	for	some	time	afterward,	so	any	heat expansion	should	still	have	been	present.	But	the	pressure	dropped	down again,	so	where	did	that	extra	pressure	go?	Raising	the	temperature	and keeping	the	same	number	of	atoms	inside	should	permanently	raise	the pressure.	But	it	didn’t.
I	quickly	realized	the	answer.	The	hydrogen	(the	only	available	thing to	burn)	combined	with	oxygen	(hence	combustion)	and	became	water. Water	is	a	thousand	times	as	dense	as	a	gas.	So	the	heat	added	to	the pressure,	and	the	transformation	of	hydrogen	and	oxygen	in	to	water brought	it	back	down	again.
The	million	dollar	question	is:	Where	the	hell	did	the	oxygen	come from?	The	whole	plan	was	to	limit	oxygen	and	keep	an	explosion	from happening.	And	it	was	working	for	quite	a	while	before	blowing	up.
I	think	I	have	my	answer.	And	it	comes	down	to	me	brain-farting.
Remember	when	I	decided	not	to	wear	a	spacesuit?	That	decision	almost killed	me.
The	medical	O2	tank	mixes	pure	oxygen	with	surrounding	air,	then feeds	it	to	you	through	a	mask.	The	mask	stays	on	your	face	with	a	little rubber	band	that	goes	around	the	back	of	your	neck.	Not	an	air-tight	seal.
I	know	what	you’re	thinking.	The	mask	leaked	oxygen.	But	no.	I	was breathing	the	oxygen.	When	I	was	inhaling,	I	made	a	nearly	airtight	seal with	the	mask	by	sucking	it	to	my	face.
The	problem	was	the	exhale.	Do	you	know	how	much	oxygen	you absorb	out	of	the	air	when	you	take	a	normal	breath?	I	don’t	know	either, but	it’s	not	100%.	With	every	breath,	I	was	taking	in	oxygen,	my	lungs grabbed	some	of	it,	then	I	was	breathing	it	out	into	the	Hab.	Every	time	I exhaled,	I	added	more	oxygen	to	the	system.
It	just	didn’t	occur	to	me.	But	it	should	have.	If	your	lungs	grabbed	up all	the	oxygen,	mouth-to-mouth	resuscitation	wouldn’t	work.	I’m	such	a dumb-ass	for	not	thinking	of	it!	And	my	dumbassery	almost	got	me killed!
I’m	really	going	to	have	to	be	more	careful.
It’s	a	good	thing	I	burned	off	most	of	the	hydrogen	before	the explosion.	Otherwise	that	would	have	been	the	end.	As	it	is,	the	explosion wasn’t	strong	enough	to	pop	the	Hab.	Though	it	was	strong	enough	to almost	blast	my	eardrums	in.
The	Water	Reclaimer	did	its	job	last	night	and	pulled	another	50L	of water	out	of	the	air.	Long	ago	before	hydrogen	became	the	focus	of	my life,	my	problem	was	the	60L	shortfall	in	water	production.	50L	of	it	is now	in	Lewis’s	spacesuit,	which	I’ll	call	“The	Cistern”	from	now	on because	it	sounds	cooler.	The	other	10L	of	water	was	absorbed	by	the	dry soil.
Lots	of	physical	labor	today.	I’ve	earned	a	full	meal.	And	to	celebrate my	first	night	back	in	the	Hab,	I’ll	kick	back	and	watch	some	shitty	20th century	TV	courtesy	of	Commander	Lewis.
“The	Dukes	of	Hazzard,”	eh?	Let’s	give	it	a	whirl.


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	42
I	slept	in	late	today.	I	deserved	it.	After	four	nights	of	awful	sleep	in the	rover,	my	bunk	felt	like	the	softest,	most	profoundly	beautiful featherbed	ever	made.
Anyway,	I	dragged	my	ass	out	of	bed	and	finished	some	postexplosion	cleanup.
I	moved	the	potato	plants	back	in	today.	And	just	in	time,	too. They’re	sprouting.	They	look	healthy	and	happy.	This	isn’t	chemistry, medicine,	bacteriology,	nutrition	analysis,	explosion	dynamics,	or	any other	shit	I’ve	been	doing	lately,	this	is	botany.	I’m	sure	I	can	at	least grow	some	plants	without	....	up.
Right?
You	know	what	really	sucks?	I’ve	only	made	130L	of	water.	I	have another	470L	to	go.	You’d	think	after	almost	killing	myself	twice,	I’d stop	screwing	around	with	hydrazine.	But	nope.	I’ll	be	reducing hydrazine	and	burning	hydrogen	in	the	Hab,	every	10	hours,	for	another 10	days.	Let’s	hope	I	do	a	better	job	of	it	from	now	on.
I’ll	have	a	lot	of	dead	time.	10	hours	for	each	tank	of	C02	to	finish filling.	It	only	takes	20	minutes	to	reduce	the	hydrazine	and	burn	the hydrogen.	I’ll	spend	the	rest	of	the	time	watching	TV.
And	seriously…	It’s	clear	the	General	Lee	can	outrun	a	police	cruiser. Why	doesn’t	Roscoe	just	go	to	the	Duke	farm	and	arrest	them	when they’re	not	in	the	car?
Chapter	6

Venkat	returned	to	his	office,	dropped	his	briefcase	on	the	floor,	and collapsed	into	his	leather	chair.	He	took	a	moment	to	look	out	the windows	at	his	scenic	view	of	the	Johnson	Space	Center.
Glancing	at	his	computer	screen,	he	noted	47	unread	emails	urgently demanding	his	attention.	They	could	wait.	Today	had	been	a	sad	day. Today	was	the	memorial	service	for	Mark	Watney.
The	President	had	given	a	speech,	praising	Watney’s	bravery	and sacrifice,	and	the	quick	actions	of	Commander	Lewis	in	getting	everyone else	to	safety.	Commander	Lewis	and	the	surviving	crew,	via	long	range communication	from	Hermes,	gave	eulogies	to	their	departed	comrade from	deep	space.	They	had	another	ten	months	of	travel	yet	to	endure.
The	Director	had	given	a	speech	as	well,	reminding	everyone	that space	flight	is	incredibly	dangerous,	and	how	we	will	not	back	down	in the	face	of	adversity.
During	preparation	for	the	service,	they’d	asked	Venkat	if	he	was willing	to	make	a	speech.	He’d	declined.	What	was	the	point?	Watney was	dead.	Nice	words	form	the	Director	of	Mars	Missions	wouldn’t	bring him	back.
“You	ok,	Venk?”	came	a	voice	from	the	doorway.
Venkat	swiveled	around.	“Guess	so,”	he	said.
“You	could	have	given	a	speech.”
“I	didn’t	want	to.	You	know	that.”
“Yeah,	I	know.	I	didn’t	want	to,	either.	But	I’m	the	director	of	NASA.
It’s	kind	of	expected.	You	sure	you’re	ok?”
“Yeah,	I’ll	be	fine.”
“Good,”	Teddy	said,	walking	in.	“Let’s	get	back	to	work,	then.”
“Sure,”	Venkat	shrugged.	“Let’s	start	with	you	authorizing	my satellite	time.”
Teddy	leaned	against	the	wall	with	a	sigh.	“This	again.”
“Yes,”	Venkat	said.	“This	again.	What	is	the	problem?”
“Ok,	run	me	through	it.	What,	exactly,	are	you	after?”
Venkat	leaned	forward.	“Ares	3	was	a	failure,	but	we	can	salvage something	from	it.	We’re	funded	for	five	Ares	missions.	I	think	we	can get	Congress	to	fund	a	sixth.”
“I	don’t	know,	Venk…”
“It’s	simple,	Teddy,”	Venkat	pressed	on.	“They	evac’d	after	six	sols. There’s	almost	an	entire	mission	worth	of	supplies	up	there.	It	would only	cost	a	fraction	of	a	normal	mission.	It	normally	takes	14	presupply probes	to	prep	a	site.	We	might	be	able	to	send	what’s	missing	in	three.
Maybe	two.”
“Venk,	the	site	got	hit	by	a	175	km/h	sandstorm.	It’ll	be	in	really	bad shape.”
“That’s	why	I	want	imagery,”	Venkat	explained.	“I	just	need	a	couple of	shots	of	the	site.	We	could	learn	a	lot.”
“Like	what?	You	think	we’d	send	people	to	Mars	without	being	sure everything	was	in	perfect	working	order?”
“Everything	doesn’t	have	to	be	perfect,”	Venkat	said	quickly. “Whatever’s	broken,	we’d	send	replacements	for.	The	only	thing	that needs	to	work	is	the	MAV.	And	we’d	have	to	send	a	fresh	one	anyway.”
“How	will	we	know	from	imagery	what’s	broken?”
“It’s	just	a	first	step.	They	evac’d	because	the	wind	was	a	threat	to	the MAV,	but	the	Hab	can	withstand	a	lot	more	punishment.	It	might	still	be in	one	piece.
“And	it’ll	be	really	obvious.	If	it	popped,	it’d	completely	blow	out and	collapse.	If	it’s	still	standing,	then	everything	inside	will	be	fine.	And the	rovers	are	solid.	They	can	take	any	sandstorm	Mars	has	to	offer.	Just let	me	take	a	look,	Teddy,	that’s	all	I	want.”
Teddy	looked	down,	“You’re	not	the	only	guy	who	wants	satellite time,	you	know.	We	have	Ares	4	supply	missions	coming	up.	We	need	to concentrate	on	Schiaparelli	Crater.”
“I	don't	get	it,	Teddy.	What's	the	problem	here?”	Venkat	asked.	“I’m talking	about	securing	us	another	mission.	We	have	12	satellites	in	orbit around	Mars,	I’m	sure	you	can	spare	one	or	two	for	a	couple	of	hours.	I can	give	you	the	windows	for	each	one	when	they’ll	be	at	the	right	angle for	Ares	3	shots-“
“It’s	not	about	satellite	time,	Venk,”	Teddy	interrupted.
Venkat	froze.	“Then…	but…	what…”
Teddy	looked	down.	“We’re	a	public	domain	organization.	There’s	no such	thing	as	secret	or	secure	information	here.”
“So?”
“Any	imagery	we	take	goes	directly	to	the	public.”
“Again:	so?”
“Mark	Watney’s	body	will	be	within	a	twenty	meters	of	the	Hab. Maybe	partially	buried	in	sand,	but	still	very	visible,	and	with	a	comm antenna	sticking	out	of	his	chest.	Any	images	we	take	will	show	that.”
Venkat	stared.	Then	glared.	“This	is	why	you	denied	my	imagery requests	for	two	months?”
“Venk,	come	on-“
“Really,	Teddy?”	he	said.	“You’re	afraid	of	a	PR	problem?”
“The	media’s	obsession	with	Watney’s	death	is	finally	starting	to taper	off,”	Teddy	said	evenly.	“It’s	been	bad	press	after	bad	press	for	two months.	Today’s	memorial	gives	people	closure,	and	the	media	can	move on	to	some	other	story.	The	last	thing	we	want	to	do	is	dredge	everything back	up.”
“So	what	do	we	do,	then?	He’s	not	going	to	decompose.	He’ll	be	there forever.”
“Not	forever,”	Teddy	said.	“Within	a	year,	he’ll	be	covered	in	sand from	normal	weather	activity.”
“A	year?”	Venkat	said,	rising	to	his	feet.	“That’s	ludicrous.	We	can’t wait	a	year	for	this.”
“Why	not?	Ares	5	won’t	even	launch	for	another	five	years.	Plenty	of time.”
Venkat	took	a	deep	breath	and	thought	for	a	moment.
“Ok,	consider	this,”	he	said.	“Sympathy	for	Watney’s	family	is	really high.	Ares	6	could	bring	the	body	back.	We	don’t	say	that’s	the	purpose of	the	mission,	but	we	make	it	clear	that	would	be	part	of	it.	If	we	framed it	that	way,	we’d	get	more	support	in	Congress.	But	not	if	we	wait	a	year.
In	a	year,	people	won’t	care	any	more.” Teddy	rubbed	his	chin.	“Hmm…” Mindy	stared	at	the	ceiling.	She	had	little	else	to	do.	The	3am	shift was	pretty	dull.	Only	a	constant	stream	of	coffee	kept	her	awake.
Monitoring	the	status	of	satellites	around	Mars	sounded	like	an exciting	proposition	when	she	took	the	transfer.	But	the	satellites	tended to	take	care	of	themselves.	Her	job	turned	out	to	be	sending	emails	as imagery	became	available.
“Master’s	Degree	in	Mechanical	Engineering,”	she	grumbled	to herself.	“And	I’m	working	in	an	all-night	photo	booth.” She	sipped	her	coffee.
A	flicker	on	her	screen	announced	another	set	of	images	were	ready for	dispatch.	She	checked	the	name	on	the	work	order.	Venkat	Kapoor.
Posting	the	data	directly	to	internal	servers,	she	composed	an	email	to Dr.	Kapoor.	As	she	entered	the	latitude	and	longitude	of	the	image,	she recognized	the	numbers.
“31.2°N,	28.5°W…	Acidalia	Planitia…	Ares	3?”
Out	of	curiosity,	she	brought	up	the	first	of	the	17	images.
As	she	suspected,	it	was	the	Ares	3	site.	She’d	heard	they	were	going to	image	it.	Slightly	ashamed	of	herself,	she	scoured	the	image	for	any sign	on	Mark	Watney’s	dead	body.	After	a	minute	of	fruitless	searching, she	was	simultaneously	relieved	and	disappointed.
She	moved	on	to	perusing	the	rest	of	the	image.	The	Hab	was	intact; Dr.	Kapoor	would	be	happy	to	see	that.
She	brought	the	coffee	mug	to	her	lips,	then	froze.
“Um…”	she	mumbled	to	herself.	“Uhhh…”
Quickly	bringing	up	the	NASA	intranet,	she	navigated	through	the site	to	the	specifics	of	the	Ares	missions.	After	some	quick	research,	she picked	up	her	phone.
“Hey,	this	is	Mindy	Park	at	SatCon.	I	need	the	mission	logs	for	Ares
3,	where	can	I	get	‘em?...	Uh	huh…	uh-huh….	Ok…	Thanks.”
After	some	more	time	on	the	intranet,	she	leaned	back	in	her	seat.	She no	longer	needed	the	coffee	to	keep	awake.
Picking	up	the	phone	again,	“Hello,	Security?	This	is	Mindy	Park	in SatCon.	I	need	the	emergency	contact	number	for	Dr.	Venkat	Kapoor… Yes,	the	Director	of	Mars	Missions…	Yes	it’s	and	emergency.”

Mindy	fidgeted	in	her	seat	as	Venkat	trudged	in.
“You	Mindy	Park?”	He	asked,	looking	mildly	annoyed.
“Yeah,”	she	quavered.	“Sorry	to	drag	you	in.”
“I’m	assuming	you	had	a	good	reason.	So?”
“Um,”	she	said,	looking	down.	“Um,	it’s.	Well.	The	imagery	you ordered.	Um.	Come	here	and	look.”
He	pulled	another	chair	to	her	station	and	seated	himself.	“Is	this about	Watney’s	body?	Is	that	why	you’re	shook	up?”
“Um,	no,”	she	said.	“Um.	Well…	uh.”	She	pointed	to	the	screen.
Venkat	inspected	the	image.	“Looks	like	the	Hab’s	in	one	piece. That’s	good	news.	Solar	array	looks	good.	The	rovers	are	ok,	too.	Main dish	isn’t	around.	No	surprise	there.	What’s	the	big	emergency?”
“Um,”	she	said,	touching	her	finger	to	the	screen.	“That.”
Venkat	leaned	in	and	looked	closer.	Just	below	the	Hab,	beside	the rovers,	two	white	circles	sat	in	the	sand.	“Hmm.	Looks	like	Hab	canvas. Maybe	the	Hab	didn’t	do	well	after	all?	I	guess	pieces	got	torn	off	and-“
“Um,”	she	interrupted.	“They	look	like	rover	pop-tents.” Venkat	looked	again.	“Hmm.	Probably	right.” “How’d	they	get	set	up?”	Mindy	asked.
Venkat	shrugged.	“Commander	Lewis	probably	ordered	them deployed	during	the	evac.	Not	a	bad	idea.	Have	the	emergency	shelters ready	in	case	the	MAV	didn’t	work	and	the	Hab	breached.”
“Yeah,	um,”	Mindy	said,	opening	a	document	on	her	computer.	“This is	the	entire	mission	log	for	Sols	1	through	6.	From	MDV	touchdown	to MAV	emergency	liftoff.”
“Ok,	and?”
“I	read	through	it.	Several	times.	They	never	threw	out	the	pop	tents.” Her	voice	cracked	at	the	last	word.
“Well,	uh…”	Venkat	said,	puzzled.	“They	obviously	did,	but	it	didn’t make	it	in	to	the	log.”
“They	activated	two	emergency	pop	tents	and	never	told	anyone?”
“Hmm.	That	doesn’t	make	a	lot	of	sense,	no.	Maybe	the	storm	messed with	the	rovers	and	the	tents	autodeployed.”
“Um,”	Mindy	stammered,	“So	after	autodeploying,	they	detached themselves	from	the	rovers	and	lined	up	next	to	each	other	20	meters away?”
Venkat	looked	back	to	the	image.	“Well	obviously	they	activated somehow.”
“Why	are	the	solar	cells	clean?”	Mindy	said,	tears	forming.	“There was	a	huge	sandstorm.	Why	isn’t	there	sand	all	over	them?” “A	good	wind	could	have	done	it?”	Venkat	said,	unsure.
“Did	I	mention	I	never	found	Watney’s	body?”	She	said,	sniffling.
Venkat’s	eyes	widened	as	he	stared	at	the	picture.	“Oh…”	he	said quietly.	“Oh	god…”
Mindy	put	her	hands	over	her	face	and	sobbed	quietly.
“....!”	Director	of	Media	Relations	Annie	Montrose	said.	“You	have got	to	be	....	kidding	me!”
Teddy	rubbed	his	forehead.	“How	sure	are	we	of	this?” “Nearly	100%,”	Venkat	said.
“....!”	Annie	said.
“Not	helping,	Annie,”	Teddy	said.
“Do	you	have	any	idea	the	magnitude	of	shitstorm	this	is	gonna’	be?” She	retorted.
“One	thing	at	a	time,”	Teddy	said.	“Venk,	what	makes	you	sure	he’s alive?”
“For	starters,	no	body.”	Venkat	explained.	“Also,	the	pop-tents	are	set up.	And	the	solar	cells	are	clean.	You	can	thank	Mindy	Park	in	SatCon	for noticing	all	that,	by	the	way.
“But,”	Venkat	continued,	“his	body	could	have	been	buried	in	the	Sol 6	storm.	The	pop	tents	might	have	autodeployed	and	wind	could	have blown	them	around.	A	30km/h	windstorm	some	time	later	would	be strong	enough	to	clean	the	solar	cells	but	not	strong	enough	to	carry	sand.
It’s	not	likely,	but	it’s	possible.
“So	I	spent	the	last	few	hours	checking	everything	I	could.
Commander	Lewis	had	two	outings	in	Rover	2.	The	second	was	on	Sol	5.
According	to	the	logs,	after	returning,	she	plugged	it	in	to	the	Hab	for recharging.	It	wasn’t	used	again,	and	13	hours	later	they	evac’d.” He	slid	a	picture	across	the	table	to	Teddy.
“That’s	one	of	the	images	from	last	night.	As	you	can	see,	Rover	2	is facing	away	from	the	Hab.	The	charging	port	is	in	the	nose,	and	the	cable isn’t	long	enough	to	reach.”
Teddy	frowned.	“She	must	have	parked	it	facing	the	Hab	or	she wouldn’t	have	been	able	to	plug	it	in,”	he	said.	“It’s	been	moved	since Sol	5.”
“Yeah,”	Venkat	said,	sliding	another	picture	to	Teddy.	“But	here’s	the real	evidence.	In	the	lower	right	of	the	image	you	can	see	the	MDV.	It’s been	taken	apart.	I’m	pretty	sure	they	wouldn’t	have	done	that	without telling	us.
“And	the	clincher	is	on	the	right	of	the	image,”	Venkat	pointed.	“The landing	struts	of	the	MAV.	Looks	like	the	fuel	plant	has	been	completely removed,	with	considerable	damage	to	the	struts	in	the	process.	There’s just	no	way	that	could	have	happened	before	liftoff.	It	would	endanger	the
MAV	way	too	much	for	Lewis	to	allow	it.”
“Hey,”	Annie	interrupted.	“Why	not	talk	to	Lewis?	Let’s	go	to
CAPCOM	and	ask	her	this	shit	directly.”
Venkat	looked	to	Teddy	knowingly.	After	a	few	moments,	Teddy sighed.
“Because,”	he	said.	“If	Watney	really	is	alive,	we	don’t	want	the	Ares
3	crew	to	know.”
“What!?”	Annie	said.	“How	can	you	not	tell	them?”
“They	have	another	ten	months	on	their	trip	home,”	Teddy	explained.
“Space	travel	is	dangerous.	They	need	to	be	alert	and	undistracted. They’re	sad	that	they	lost	a	crewmate,	but	they’d	be	devastated	if	they found	out	they’d	abandoned	him	alive.”
Annie	looked	to	Venkat.	“You’re	on	board	with	this?”
“It’s	a	no-brainer,”	Venkat	said.	“Let	‘em	deal	with	that	emotional trauma	when	they’re	not	flying	a	spaceship	around.”
“This’ll	be	the	most	talked-about	event	since	Apollo	11,”	Annie	said.
“How	will	you	keep	it	from	them?”
Teddy	shrugged.	“Easy.	We	control	all	communication	with	them.”
“....,”	Annie	said,	opening	her	laptop.	“When	do	you	want	to	go public?”
“What’s	your	take,”	he	asked.
“Mmm,”	Annie	said,	“We	can	hold	the	pics	for	24	hours	before	we’re required	to	make	them	public.	We’ll	need	to	release	a	statement	along with	them.	We	don’t	want	people	working	it	out	on	their	own.	We’d	look like	assholes.”
“Ok,”	Teddy	agreed,	“put	together	a	statement.” “This	is	so	....	up,”	she	said.
“Where	do	we	go	from	here?”	Teddy	asked	Venkat.
“Step	one	is	communication,”	Venkat	said.	“From	the	pics,	it’s	clear the	comm	array	is	ruined.	We	need	another	way	to	talk.	Once	we	can	talk, we	can	assess	and	make	plans.”
“All	right,”	Teddy	said.	“Get	on	it.	Take	anyone	you	want	for	any department.	Use	as	much	overtime	as	you	want.	Find	a	way	to	talk	to him.	That’s	your	only	job	right	now.”
“Got	it.”
“Annie,	make	sure	nobody	gets	wind	of	this	till	we	announce.”
“Right,”	Annie	said.	“Who	else	knows?”
“Just	the	three	of	us	and	Mindy	Park	in	SatCon,”	Venkat	said.
“I’ll	have	a	word	with	her,”	Annie	said.
Teddy	stood	and	opened	his	cell	phone.	“I’m	going	to	Chicago.	I’ll	be back	later	today.”
“Why?”	Annie	asked.
“That’s	where	Watney’s	parents	live,”	Teddy	said.	“I	owe	them	a personal	explanation	before	it	breaks	on	the	news.”
“They’ll	be	happy	to	hear	their	son’s	alive,”	Annie	said.
“Yeah,	he’s	alive,”	Teddy	said.	“But	if	my	math	is	right,	he’s	doomed to	starve	to	death	before	we	can	possibly	help	him.	I’m	not	looking forward	to	the	conversation.”
“....,”	Annie	said,	thoughtfully.
“Nothing?	Nothing	at	all?”	Venkat	groaned.	“Are	you	kidding	me?
You	had	20	experts	working	for	12	hours	on	this.	We	have	a	multi-billion dollar	communication	network.	You	can’t	figure	out	any	way	to	talk	to him?”
The	two	men	in	Venkat’s	office	fidgeted	in	their	chairs.
“He’s	got	no	radio,”	said	Chuck.
“Actually,”	said	Morris,	“He’s	got	a	radio,	but	he	doesn’t	have	a dish.”
“Thing	is,”	Chuck	continued,	“without	the	dish,	a	signal	would	have to	be	really	strong-“
“Like,	melting-the-pigeons	strong-“	Morris	supplied.
“-for	him	to	get	it.”	Chuck	finished.
“We	considered	Martian	satellites,”	Morris	said.	“They’re	way	closer. But	the	math	doesn’t	work	out.	Even	SuperSurveyor	3,	which	has	the strongest	transmitter,	would	need	to	be	14	times	more	powerful-“ “17	times,”	Chuck	said.
“14	times,”	Morris	asserted.
“No	it’s	17.	You	forgot	the	amperage	minimum	for	the	heaters	to keep	the-“
“Guys,”	Venkat	interrupted.	“I	get	the	idea.”
“Sorry.”
“Sorry.”
“Sorry	if	I’m	grumpy,”	Venkat	said.	“I	got	like	2	hours	sleep	last night.”
“No	problem,”	Morris	said.
“Totally	understandable,”	Chuck	said.
“Ok,”	Venkat	said.	“Explain	to	me	how	a	single	windstorm	removed our	ability	to	talk	to	Ares	3.”
“Failure	of	imagination,”	Chuck	said.
“Totally	didn’t	see	it	coming,”	Morris	agreed.
“How	many	back-up	communication	systems	does	an	Ares	mission have?”	Venkat	asked.
“Four,”	Chuck	said.
“Three,”	Morris	said.
“No,	it’s	four,”	Chuck	corrected.
“He	said	back-up	systems,”	Morris	insisted.	“That	means	not including	the	primary	system.”
“Oh	right.	Three.”
“So	four	systems	total,	then,”	Venkat	said.	“Explain	how	we	lost	all four.”
“Well,”	Chuck	said,	“The	primary	ran	through	the	big	satellite	dish.	It blew	away	in	the	storm.	The	rest	of	the	backups	were	the	MAV.”
“Yup,”	Morris	agreed.	“The	MAV	is,	like,	a	communicating	machine. It	can	talk	to	Earth,	Hermes,	even	satellites	around	Mars	if	it	has	to.	And it	has	three	independent	systems	to	make	sure	nothing	short	of	a	meteor strike	can	stop	communication.”
“Problem	is,”	Chuck	said.	“Commander	Lewis	and	the	rest	of	them took	the	MAV	when	they	left.”
“So	four	independent	communication	systems	became	one.	And	that one	broke,”	Morris	finished.
Venkat	pinched	the	bridge	of	his	nose.	“How	could	we	overlook	this?”
Chuck	shrugged.	“Never	occurred	to	us.	We	never	thought	someone would	be	on	Mars	without	an	MAV.”
“I	mean,	come	on!”	Morris	said.	“What	are	the	odds?”
Chuck	turned	to	him.	“One	in	three,	based	on	empirical	data.	That’s pretty	bad	if	you	think	about	it.”

“Thank	you	all	for	coming	on	such	short	notice,”	Annie	said.	“We have	an	important	announcement	to	make.	If	you	could	all	take	your seats,”
“What	this	about,	Annie?”	A	reporter	asked.	“Something	happen	with Hermes?”
“Please	take	your	seats,”	Annie	repeated.
The	reporters	mingled	a	bit,	argued	over	seats	for	a	short	time,	then finally	settled	down.
“This	is	a	short,	but	very	important	announcement,”	Annie	said.	“I won’t	be	taking	any	questions	at	this	time,	but	we	will	have	a	full	press conference	with	Q&A	in	about	an	hour.	We	have	recently	reviewed satellite	imagery	from	Mars,	and	have	confirmed	that	astronaut	Mark Watney	is,	currently,	still	alive.”
After	one	full	second	of	utter	silence,	the	room	exploded	with	noise.

“I’m	getting	sick	of	daily	press	conferences,”	Venkat	said.
“I’m	getting	sick	of	hourly	press	conferences,”	Annie	countered.
“Sorry	I’m	late,”	Teddy	said,	entering	the	crowded	press	room. Managers	from	every	department	stood	shoulder	to	shoulder	in	the	back, while	reporters	crammed	the	pit.
Teddy	pulled	some	flash	cards	from	his	pocket,	then	cleared	his throat.
“In	the	nine	days	since	announcing	Mark	Watney’s	survival,	we’re received	a	massive	show	of	support	from	all	sectors.	We’re	using	this shamelessly	every	way	we	can.”
A	small	chuckle	cascaded	through	the	room.
“Yesterday,	at	our	request,	the	entire	SETI	network	focused	on	Mars. Just	in	case	Watney	was	sending	a	weak	radio	signal.	Turns	out	he wasn’t,	but	it	shows	the	level	of	commitment	everyone	has	toward helping	us.
“The	public	is	engaged,	and	we	will	do	our	best	to	keep	everyone informed.	I’ve	recently	learned	CNN	will	be	dedicating	a	half-hour segment	every	weekday	to	reporting	on	just	this	issue.	We	will	assign several	members	of	our	Media	Relations	team	to	that	program,	so	the public	can	get	the	latest	information	as	fast	as	possible.
“We	have	adjusted	the	orbits	of	three	satellites	to	get	more	view	time on	the	Ares	3	site,	and	hope	to	catch	an	image	of	him	outside	soon.	If	we can	see	him	outside,	we	will	be	able	to	draw	conclusions	on	his	physical health	based	on	stance	and	activities.
“The	questions	are	many:	How	long	can	he	last?	How	much	food	does he	have?	Can	Ares	4	rescue	him?	How	will	we	talk	to	him?	The	answers to	these	questions	are	not	what	we	want	to	hear.
“I	can’t	promise	we’ll	succeed	in	rescuing	him,	but	I	can	promise this:	The	entire	focus	of	NASA	will	be	to	bring	Mark	Watney	home.	This will	be	our	overriding	and	singular	obsession	until	he	is	either	back	on Earth,	or	confirmed	dead	on	Mars.”

“Nice	speech,”	Venkat	said	as	he	entered	Teddy’s	office.
“Meant	every	word	of	it,”	Teddy	said.
“Oh,	I	know.”
“What	can	I	do	for	you,	Venk?”
“I’ve	got	an	idea.	Well,	JPL	has	an	idea.	I’m	the	messenger.” “I	like	ideas,”	Teddy	said,	gesturing	to	a	seat.
Venkat	sat	down.
“We	can	rescue	him	with	Ares	4.	It’s	very	risky.	We	ran	the	idea	by the	Ares	4	crew.	Not	only	are	they	willing	to	do	it,	but	now	they’re	really pushing	hard	for	it.”
“Naturally,”	Teddy	said.	“Astronauts	are	inherently	insane.	And	really noble.	What’s	the	idea?”
“Well,”	Venkat	began,	“It’s	in	the	rough	stages,	but	JPL	thinks	the
MDV	can	be	misused	to	save	him.”
“Ares	4	hasn’t	even	launched	yet.	Why	misuse	an	MDV.	Why	not make	something	better?”
“We	don’t	have	time	to	make	a	custom	craft.	Actually,	he	can’t	even survive	till	Ares	4	gets	there,	but	that’s	a	different	problem.”
“So	tell	me	about	the	MDV.”
“JPL	strips	it	down,	loses	some	weight,	and	adds	some	fuel	tanks. Ares	4’s	crew	lands	at	the	Ares	3	site,	very	efficiently.	Then,	with	a	full burn,	and	I	mean	a	full	burn,	they	can	lift	off	again.	It	can’t	get	back	to orbit,	but	it	can	go	to	the	Ares	4	site	on	a	lateral	trajectory	that’s,	well, really	scary.	Then	they	have	an	MAV.	This	would	require	a	massive design	and	construction	effort,	but	JPL	says	they	can	make	it	happen.”
“How	are	they	losing	weight?”	Teddy	asked.	“Don’t	they	already	have it	as	light	as	it	can	be?”
“By	removing	safety	and	emergency	equipment.”
“Wonderful,”	Teddy	said,	“So	we’d	be	risking	the	lives	of	six	more people	in	a	very	dangerous	landing,	re-liftoff,	re-landing	process.”
“Yup,”	Venkat	said.	“It	would	be	safer	to	leave	the	Ares	4	crew	in Hermes,	and	only	send	the	pilot	down	with	the	MDV.	But	that	would mean	giving	up	the	mission	and	they’d	rather	risk	death.”
“They’re	astronauts,”	Teddy	said.
“They’re	astronauts,”	Venkat	confirmed.
“Well.	That’s	a	ludicrous	idea	and	I’ll	never	ok	it.”
“We’ll	work	on	it	some	more,”	Venkat	said.	“Try	to	make	it	safer.” “Do	that.	Any	idea	how	to	keep	him	alive	for	four	years?”
“Nope.”
“Work	on	that,	too.” “Will	do,”	Venkat	said.
Teddy	swiveled	his	chair	and	looked	out	the	window	to	the	sky beyond.	Night	was	edging	in.	“What	must	it	be	like?”	He	pondered.	“He’s stuck	out	there.	He	thinks	he’s	totally	alone	and	that	we	all	gave	up	on him.	What	kind	of	effect	does	that	have	on	a	man’s	psychology?”
He	turned	back	to	Venkat.	“I	wonder	what	he’s	thinking	right	now.”


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	61

How	come	Aquaman	can	control	whales?	They’re	mammals!	Makes no	sense.

Chapter	7

LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	63

I	finished	making	water	some	time	ago.	I’m	no	longer	in	danger	of blowing	myself	up.	The	potatoes	are	growing	nicely.	Nothing	has conspired	to	kill	me	in	weeks.	And	‘70’s	TV	keeps	me	disturbingly	more entertained	than	it	should.	Things	are	stable	here	on	Mars.
It’s	time	to	start	thinking	long	term.
Even	if	I	find	a	way	to	tell	NASA	I’m	alive,	there’s	no	guarantee they’ll	be	able	to	save	me.	I	need	to	be	proactive.	I	need	to	figure	out	how to	get	to	Ares	4.
Won’t	be	easy.
Ares	4	will	be	landing	at	the	Schiaparelli	Crater,	3,200km	away.	In fact,	their	MAV	is	already	there.	I	know	because	I	watched	Martinez	land it.
It	takes	18	months	for	the	MAV	to	make	its	fuel,	so	it’s	the	first	thing NASA	sends	along.	Sending	it	48	months	early	gives	it	plenty	of	extra time	in	case	fuel	reactions	go	slower	than	expected.	But	much	more importantly,	it	means	a	precision	soft-landing	can	be	done	remotely	by	a pilot	in	orbit.	Direct	remote	operation	from	Houston	isn’t	an	option; they’re	anywhere	from	4	to	20	light-minutes	away.
Ares	4’s	MAV	spent	11	months	getting	to	Mars.	Using	less	fuel	and taking	a	longer	route,	it	got	there	around	the	same	time	as	us.	As expected,	Martinez	landed	it	beautifully.	It	was	one	of	the	last	things	we did	before	piling	in	to	our	MDV	and	heading	to	the	surface.	Ahh,	the good	old	days,	when	I	had	a	crew	with	me.
I’m	lucky.	3,200km	isn’t	that	bad.	It	could	have	been	up	to	10,000km away.	And	because	I’m	on	the	flattest	part	of	Mars,	the	first	650km	is nice,	smooth	terrain	(Yay	Acidalia	Planitia!)	but	the	rest	of	it	is	nasty, rugged,	crater-pocked	hell.
Obviously,	I’ll	have	to	use	a	rover.	And	guess	what?	They	weren’t designed	for	massive	overland	journeys.
This	is	going	to	be	a	research	effort,	with	a	bunch	of	experimentation. I’ll	have	to	become	my	own	little	NASA,	figuring	out	how	to	explore	far from	the	Hab.	The	good	news	is	I	have	lots	of	time	to	figure	it	out.
Almost	4	years.
Some	stuff	is	obvious.	I’ll	need	to	use	a	rover.	It’ll	take	a	long	time, so	I’ll	need	to	bring	supplies.	I’ll	need	to	recharge	en-route,	and	rovers don’t	have	solar	cells.	I’ll	need	to	steal	some	from	the	Hab’s	solar	farm.
During	the	trip	I’ll	need	to	breathe,	eat,	and	drink.
Lucky	for	me,	the	tech	specs	for	everything	are	right	here	in	the computer.
I’ll	need	to	trick	out	a	rover.	Basically	it’ll	have	to	be	a	mobile	Hab. I’ll	pick	Rover	2	as	my	target.	We	have	a	certain	bond,	after	I	spent	two days	in	it	during	the	“Great	Hydrogen	Scare	of	Sol	37.”
There’s	too	much	shit	to	think	about	all	at	once.	So	for	now,	I’ll	just think	about	power.
Our	mission	had	a	10km	operational	radius.	Knowing	we	wouldn’t take	straight-line	paths,	NASA	designed	the	rovers	to	go	35km	on	a	full charge.	That	presumes	flat,	reasonable	terrain.	Each	rover	has	a	9000Wh battery.
Step	one	is	to	loot	Rover	1’s	battery	and	install	it	in	Rover	2.	Ta-daa!
I	just	doubled	my	full-charge	range.
There’s	just	one	complication.	Heating.
Part	of	the	battery	power	goes	to	heating	the	rover.	Mars	is	really cold.	Normally,	we	were	expected	to	do	all	EVAs	in	under	5	hours.	But I’ll	be	living	in	it	24½	hours	a	day.	According	to	the	specs,	the	heating equipment	soaks	up	400W.	Keeping	it	on	would	eat	up	9800Wh	per	day.
Over	half	my	power	supply,	every	day!
But	I	do	have	a	free	source	of	heat:	Me.	A	couple	million	years	of evolution	gave	me	“warm	blooded”	technology.	I	can	wear	layers.	The rover	has	good	insulation,	too.	It’ll	have	to	be	enough;	I	need	every	bit	of power.
And	because	I	need	to	bundle	up	anyway,	I	can	deactivate	the	heater outright	and	use	all	the	power	for	motion	(minus	a	negligible	amount	for computer,	life	support,	etc.)
According	to	my	boring	math,	moving	the	rover	eats	200Wh	of	juice to	go	1km,	so	using	the	full	18,000Wh	gets	me	90km	of	travel.	Now we’re	talkin’.
I’ll	never	actually	get	90km	on	a	single	charge.	I’ll	have	hills	to	deal with,	and	rough	terrain,	sand,	etc.	But	it’s	a	good	ballpark.	It	tells	me	that it	would	take	at	least	35	days	of	travel	to	get	to	Ares	4.	It’ll	probably	be more	like	50.	But	that’s	plausible,	at	least.
	At	the	rover’s	blazing	25kph	top	speed,	it’ll	take	me	3½	hours	before I	run	the	battery	down.	I’d	like	to	charge	the	battery	up	during	the	rest	of the	day.	I	can	drive	in	twilight,	and	save	the	sunny	part	of	the	day	for charging.	This	time	of	year	I	get	about	13	hours	of	light.	How	many	solar cells	will	I	have	to	pilfer	from	the	Hab’s	farm?
Thanks	to	the	fine	taxpayers	of	America,	I	have	over	100	of	square meters	of	the	most	expensive	solar	paneling	ever	made.	It	has	an astounding	10.2%	efficiency,	which	is	good	because	Mars	doesn’t	get	as much	sunlight	as	Earth.	Only	500	to	700	watts	per	square	meter (Compared	to	the	1400	those	spoiled	Earthlings	get).
Long	story	short:	I	need	to	bring	28	square	meters	of	solar	cell.	That’s 14	panels.
I	can	put	two	stacks	of	7	on	the	roof.	They’ll	stick	out	over	the	edges, but	as	long	as	they’re	secure	I’m	happy.	Every	day,	after	driving,	I’ll spread	them	out	then…	wait	all	day.	Man	it’ll	be	dull.
Well	it’s	a	start.	Tomorrow’s	mission:	transfer	Rover	1’s	battery	to Rover	2.


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	64

Sometimes	things	are	easy,	and	sometimes	they’re	not.	Getting	the battery	out	of	Rover	1	was	easy.	I	removed	two	clamps	on	the undercarriage	and	it	dropped	right	out.	The	cabling	is	easy	to	detach,	too.
It’s	just	a	couple	of	complicated	plugs.
Attaching	it	to	Rover	2,	however,	is	another	story.	There’s	nowhere	to put	it!
The	things	is	huge.	I	was	barely	able	to	drag	it.	And	that’s	in	Mars gravity.
It’s	just	too	big.	There’s	no	room	in	the	undercarriage	for	a	second one.	There’s	no	room	on	the	roof,	either.	That’s	where	the	solar	cells	will go.	There’s	no	room	inside	the	cabin,	and	it	wouldn’t	fit	through	the airlock	anyway.
But	fear	not,	I	found	a	solution.
For	emergencies	completely	unrelated	to	this	one,	NASA	provided	6 square	meters	of	Hab	canvas,	and	some	really	impressive	resin.	The	same kind	of	resin,	in	fact,	that	saved	my	life	on	Sol	6	(the	patch	kit	I	used	on the	hole	in	my	suit).
	In	the	event	of	a	Hab	breach,	everyone	would	run	to	the	airlocks. Procedure	was	to	let	it	pop	rather	than	die	trying	to	prevent	it.	Then,	we’d suit	up	and	assess	the	damage.	Once	we	found	the	breach,	we’d	seal	it with	the	spare	Hab	canvas	and	resin.	Then	re-inflate	and	we’re	good	as new.
The	6	square	meters	of	spare	canvas	was	a	convenient	1x6	meters.	I cut	10cm	wide	strips,	then	used	them	to	make	a	sort	of	harness.
I	used	the	resin	and	straps	to	make	two	10m	circumference	loops. Then	I	put	a	big	patch	of	canvas	on	each	end.	I	now	had	poor-man’s saddlebags	for	my	rover.
This	is	getting	more	and	more	“Wagon	Train”	every	day.
The	resin	sets	almost	instantly.	But	it	gets	stronger	if	you	wait	an hour.	So	I	did.	Then	I	suited	up	and	headed	out	to	the	rover.
I	dragged	the	battery	to	the	side	of	the	rover	and	looped	one	end	of	the harness	around	it.	Then	I	threw	the	other	end	over	the	roof.	On	the	other side,	I	filled	it	with	rocks.	When	the	two	weights	were	roughly	equal,	I was	able	to	pull	the	rocks	down	and	bring	the	battery	up.
Yay!
Unplugging	Rover	2’s	battery,	I	plugged	in	Rover	1’s.	Then	I	went through	the	airlock	to	the	rover	and	checked	all	systems.	Everything	was a-ok.
I	drove	the	rover	around	a	bit	to	make	sure	the	harness	was	secure.	I found	a	few	large-ish	rocks	to	drive	over,	just	to	shake	things	up.	The harness	held.	Hell	yeah.
For	a	short	time,	I	wondered	how	to	splice	the	second	battery’s	leads into	the	main	power	supply.	My	conclusion	was	“....	it.”
There’s	no	need	to	have	a	continuous	power	supply.	When	Battery	1 runs	out,	I	can	get	out,	unplug	Battery	1	and	plug	in	Battery	2.	Why	not? It’s	a	10	minute	EVA,	once	per	day.	I’d	have	to	swap	batteries	again when	charging,	but	again:	so	what?
I	spent	the	rest	of	the	day	sweeping	off	the	solar	cell	farm.	Soon,	I shall	be	looting	it.
LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	65
The	solar	cells	were	a	lot	easier	to	manage	than	the	battery.
They’re	thin,	light,	and	just	laying	around	on	the	ground.	And	I	had one	additional	bonus:	I	was	the	one	who	set	them	up	In	the	first	place.
Well,	ok.	It	wasn’t	just	me.	Vogel	and	I	worked	together	on	it.	And boy	did	we	drill	on	it.	We	spent	almost	an	entire	week	drilling	on	the solar	array	alone.	Then	we	drilled	more	whenever	they	figured	we	had spare	time.	It	had	been	deemed	mission	critical.	If	we	....	it	up	and broke	the	cells	or	rendered	them	useless,	the	Hab	wouldn’t	be	able	to make	power,	and	the	mission	would	end.
You	might	wonder	what	the	rest	of	the	crew	were	doing.	They	were setting	up	the	Hab.	Remember,	everything	in	my	glorious	kingdom	came here	in	boxes.	We	had	to	set	it	up	on	Sols	1	and	2.
Each	solar	cell	is	on	a	lightweight	lattice	that	holds	it	at	a	14	degree angle.	I’ll	admit	I	don’t	know	why	it’s	a	14	degree	angle.	Something about	maximizing	solar	energy.	Anyway,	removing	the	cells	was	simple.
Then	it	was	time	to	stack	them	on	the	rover.
I	considered	removing	the	rock	sample	container.	It’s	nothing	more than	a	large	canvas	bag	attached	to	the	roof.	Way	too	small	to	hold	the solar	cells.	But	after	some	thought	I	left	it	there,	figuring	It’ll	provide	a good	cushion.
The	cells	stacked	well	(they	were	made	to,	for	transport	to	Mars),	and
the	two	stacks	sat	nicely	on	the	roof.	They	hung	over	the	left	and	right edges,	but	I	won’t	be	going	through	any	tunnels	so	I	don’t	care.
With	some	more	abuse	of	the	emergency	Hab	material,	I	made	straps and	tied	the	cells	down.	The	rover	has	external	handles	near	the	front	and back.	They’re	there	to	help	us	load	rocks	on	the	roof.	They	made	perfect anchor	points	for	the	straps.
I	stood	back	and	admired	my	work.	Hey,	I	earned	it.	It	wasn’t	even noon	and	I	was	done.
I	came	back	to	the	Hab,	had	some	lunch,	and	worked	on	my	crops	for the	rest	of	the	sol.	It's	been	39	sols	since	I	planted	the	potatoes	(which	is about	40	Earth	days),	and	it	was	time	to	reap	and	re-sow.
They	grew	even	better	than	I	had	expected.	Mars	has	no	insects, parasites,	or	blights	to	deal	with,	and	the	Hab	maintains	perfect	growing temperature	and	moisture	at	all	times.
They	were	small	compared	to	the	taters	you'd	usually	eat,	but	that's fine.	All	I	wanted	was	enough	to	support	growing	new	plants.
I	dug	them	up,	being	careful	to	leave	their	plants	alive.	Then	I	cut them	up	in	to	small	pieces	with	one	eye	each,	and	re-seeded	in	to	new dirt.	If	they	keep	growing	this	well,	I'll	be	able	to	last	a	good	long	time here.
After	all	that	physical	labor,	I	deserved	a	break.	I	rifled	through Johanssen’s	computer	today,	and	found	an	endless	supply	of	digital books.	Looks	like	she’s	a	big	fan	of	Agatha	Christie.	Beatles,	Christie…	I guess	Johanssen’s	an	anglophile	or	something.
I	remember	liking	Hercule	Poirot	TV	specials	back	when	I	was	a	kid. I’ll	start	with	The	Mysterious	Affair	at	Styles.	Looks	like	that’s	the	first one.


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	66

The	time	has	come	(ominous	musical	crescendo)	for	some	missions!
NASA	gets	to	name	their	missions	after	gods	and	stuff,	so	why	can’t
I?	Henceforth,	rover	experimental	missions	will	be	“Sirius”	missions.	Get it?	Dogs?	Well	if	you	don’t,	....	you.
Sirius	1	will	be	tomorrow.
The	mission:	Starting	with	fully	charged	batteries,	and	having	the solar	cells	on	the	roof,	drive	until	I	run	out	of	power,	and	see	how	far	I get.
I	won’t	be	an	idiot.	I’m	not	driving	directly	away	from	the	Hab.	I’ll drive	a	half-kilometer	stretch,	back	and	forth.	I’ll	be	within	a	short	walk of	home	all	times.
Tonight,	I’ll	charge	up	both	batteries	so	I	can	be	ready	for	a	little	test drive	tomorrow.	I	estimate	3½	hours	of	driving,	so	I’ll	need	to	bring	fresh CO2	filters.	And,	with	the	heater	off,	I’ll	wear	three	layers	of	clothes.
LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	67
Sirius	1	is	complete!
More	accurately,	Sirius	1	was	aborted	after	1	hour.	I	guess	you	could call	it	a	“failure”	but	I	prefer	the	term	“learning	experience.”
Things	started	out	fine.	I	drove	to	a	nice	flat	spot	a	kilometer	from	the Hab,	then	started	going	back	and	forth	over	a	500m	stretch.
I	quickly	realized	this	would	be	a	crappy	test.	After	a	few	laps,	I	had compressed	the	soil	enough	to	have	a	solid	path.	Nice,	hard	ground, which	makes	for	abnormally	high	energy	efficiency.	This	is	nothing	like it	would	be	on	a	long	trip.
So	I	shook	it	up	a	bit.	I	drove	around	randomly,	making	sure	to	stay within	a	kilometer	of	the	Hab.	A	much	more	realistic	test.
After	an	hour,	things	started	to	get	cold.	And	I	mean	really	cold.
The	rover’s	always	cold	when	you	first	get	in	it.	When	you	haven’t disabled	the	heater	it	warms	up	right	away.	I	expected	it	to	be	cold,	but Jesus	Christ!
I	was	fine	for	a	while.	My	own	body	heat	plus	three	layers	of	clothing kept	me	warm	and	the	rover’s	insulation	is	top-notch.	The	heat	that escaped	my	body	just	warmed	up	the	interior.	But	there’s	no	such	thing	as perfect	insulation,	and	eventually	the	heat	left	to	the	great	outdoors	while I	got	colder	and	colder.
Within	an	hour,	I	was	chattering	and	numb.	Enough	was	enough.
There’s	no	way	I	could	do	a	long	trip	like	this.	The	test	was	over.
Turning	the	heater	on,	I	drove	straight	back	to	the	Hab.
Once	I	got	home,	I	sulked	for	a	while.	All	my	brilliant	plans	foiled	by thermodynamics.	Damn	you,	Entropy!
I’m	in	a	bind.	The	damn	heater	will	eat	half	my	battery	power	every day.	I	could	turn	it	down,	I	guess.	Be	a	little	cold	but	not	freezing	to death.	Even	then	I’d	still	lose	at	least	a	quarter.
This	will	require	some	thought.	I	have	to	ask	myself…	what	would Hercule	Poirot	do?	I’ll	have	to	put	my	“little	gray	cells”	to	work	on	the problem.


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	68

Well	shit.
I	came	up	with	a	solution,	but…	remember	when	I	burned	rocket	fuel in	the	Hab?	This’ll	be	more	dangerous.
I’m	going	to	use	the	RTG.
The	RTG	(Radioisotope	Thermoelectric	Generator)	is	a	big	box	of Plutonium.	But	not	the	kind	used	in	nuclear	bombs.	No,	no.	This Plutonium	is	way	more	dangerous!
Plutonium-238	is	an	incredibly	unstable	isotope.	It’s	so	radioactive that	it	will	get	red	hot	all	by	itself.	As	you	can	imagine,	a	material	that can	literally	fry	an	egg	with	radiation	is	kind	of	dangerous.
The	RTG	houses	the	Plutonium,	catches	the	radiation	in	the	form	of heat,	and	turns	it	in	to	electricity.	It’s	not	a	reactor.	The	radiation	can’t	be increased	or	decreased.	It’s	a	purely	natural	process	happening	at	the atomic	level.
As	long	ago	as	the	1960’s,	NASA’s	been	using	RTGs	to	power unmanned	probes.	It	has	lots	of	advantages	over	solar	power.	It’s	not affected	by	storms;	it	works	day	or	night;	it’s	entirely	internal,	so	you don’t	need	delicate	solar	cells	all	over	your	probe.
But	they	never	used	large	RTGs	on	manned	missions	until	The	Ares Program.
Why	not?	It	should	be	pretty	....	obvious	why	not!	They	didn’t want	to	put	astronauts	next	to	a	glowing	hot	ball	of	radioactive	death!
I'm	exaggerating	a	little.	The	Plutonium	is	inside	a	bunch	of	pellets, each	one	sealed	and	insulated	to	prevent	radiation	leakage	even	if	the outer	container	is	breached.	So	for	the	Ares	Program,	they	took	the	risk.
An	Ares	mission	is	all	about	the	MAV.	It’s	the	single	most	important component.	It’s	one	of	the	few	systems	that	can’t	be	replaced	or	worked around.	It’s	the	only	component	that	causes	a	complete	mission	scrub	if it’s	not	working.
Solar	cells	are	great	in	the	short-term,	and	they’re	good	for	the	longterm	if	you	have	humans	around	to	clean	them.	But	the	MAV	sits	alone for	years	quietly	making	fuel,	then	just	kind	of	hangs	out	until	its	crew arrives.	Even	doing	nothing,	it	needs	power,	so	NASA	can	monitor	it remotely	and	run	self	checks.
The	prospect	of	scrubbing	a	mission	because	a	solar	cell	got	dirty	was unacceptable.	They	needed	a	more	reliable	source	of	power.	So	the	MAV comes	equipped	with	an	RTG.	It	has	2.6kg	of	Plutonium-238,	which makes	almost	1500	Watts	of	heat.	It	can	turn	that	in	to	100	Watts	of electricity.	The	MAV	runs	on	that	until	the	crew	arrive.
100	Watts	isn’t	enough	to	keep	the	heater	going,	but	I	don’t	care about	the	electrical	output.	I	want	the	heat.	A	1500	Watt	heater	is	so warm	I’ll	have	to	tear	insulation	out	of	the	rover	to	keep	it	from	getting too	hot.
As	soon	as	the	rovers	were	un-stowed	and	activated,	Commander
Lewis	had	the	joy	of		disposing	of	the	RTG.	She	detached	it	from	the MAV,	drove	4	km	away,	and	buried	it.	However	safe	it	may	be,	it's	still	a radioactive	core	and	NASA	didn't	want	it	too	close	to	their	astronauts. The	mission	parameters	don’t	give	a	specific	location	to	dump	the RTG.	Just	“At	least	4km	away”.	So	I’ll	have	to	find	it.
I	have	two	things	working	for	me.	First,	I	was	assembling	solar	panels with	Vogel	when	Commander	Lewis	drove	off,	and	I	saw	she	headed	due south.	Also,	she	planted	a	3	meter	pole	with	a	bright	green	flag	on	it where	she	buried	it.	Green	shows	up	extremely	well	against	the	Martian terrain.	It’s	made	to	ward	us	off,	in	case	we	get	lost	on	a	rover	EVA	later on.
So	my	plan	is:	Head	south	4km,	then	search	around	till	I	see	the	green flag.
Having	rendered	Rover	1	unusable,	I’ll	have	to	use	my	Mutant	Rover for	the	trip.	I	can	make	a	useful	test	mission	of	it.	I’ll	see	how	well	the battery	harness	holds	up	to	a	real	journey,	and	how	well	the	solar	cells	do strapped	to	the	roof.
I’ll	call	it	Sirius	2.


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	69

Found	the	RTG.
It	wasn’t	hard	to	find.	I	drove	4km	south	and	saw	the	flag	right	away.
Commander	Lewis	had	buried	it	atop	a	small	hill.	She	probably wanted	to	make	sure	everyone	could	see	the	flag,	and	it	worked	great! Except	instead	of	avoiding	it,	I	bee-lined	to	it	and	dug	it	up.	Not	exactly what	she	was	going	for.
It’s	a	large	cylinder	with	heat-sinks	all	around	it.	I	could	feel	the warmth	it	gave	off	even	through	my	suit’s	gloves.	That’s	really disconcerting.	Especially	when	you	know	the	root	cause	of	the	heat	is radiation.
No	point	in	putting	it	on	the	roof;	my	plan	was	to	have	it	in	the	cabin anyway.	So	I	brought	it	in	with	me,	turned	off	the	heater,	then	drove	back to	the	Hab.
In	the	10	minutes	it	took	to	get	home,	even	with	the	heater	off,	the interior	of	the	rover	became	an	uncomfortably	hot	37C.	The	RTG	would definitely	be	able	to	keep	me	warm.
The	trip	also	proved	my	rigging	worked.	The	solar	cells	and	extra battery	stayed	beautifully	in	place	while	traversing	8km	of	random terrain.
I	declare	Sirius	2	to	be	a	successful	mission!
I	spent	the	rest	of	the	day	vandalizing	the	interior	of	the	rover.	The pressure	compartment	is	made	of	metal.	Just	inside	that	is	insulation, which	is	covered	by	hard	plastic.	I	used	a	sophisticated	method	to	remove sections	of	plastic	(hammer),	then	carefully	removed	the	solid	foam insulation	(hammer	again).
After	tearing	out	some	insulation,	I	suited	up	and	took	the	RTG outside.	Soon,	the	rover	cooled	down	again,	and	I	brought	it	back	in.	I watched	as	the	temperature	rose	slowly.	Nowhere	near	as	fast	as	it	had	on my	trip	back	from	the	burial	site.
I	cautiously	removed	more	insulation	(hammer)	and	checked	again.
After	a	few	more	cycles	of	this,	I	had	enough	insulation	torn	out	that	the RTG	could	barely	keep	up	with	it.	In	fact,	it	was	a	losing	battle.	Over time,	heat	would	slowly	leech	out.	That’s	fine.	I	can	turn	on	the	heater	for short	bursts	when	necessary.
I	brought	the	insulation	pieces	with	me	back	in	to	the	Hab.	Using advanced	construction	techniques	(duct	tape)	I	reassembled	some	of	it into	a	square.	I	figure	if	things	got	really	cold,	I	could	tape	that	to	a	bare patch	in	the	rover,	and	the	RTG	would	be	winning	the	“heat	fight.”
Tomorrow,	Sirius	3	(Which	is	just	Sirius	1	again,	but	without freezing)


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	70

Today,	I	write	to	you	from	the	rover.	I’m	halfway-through	Sirius	3 and	things	are	going	well.
I	set	out	at	first	light	and	drove	laps	around	the	Hab,	trying	to	stay	on untouched	ground.	The	first	battery	lasted	just	under	two	hours.	After	a quick	EVA	to	switch	the	cables,	I	got	back	to	driving.	When	all	was	said and	done,	I	had	driven	81km	in	3	hours	and	27	minutes.
That’s	very	good!	Mind	you,	the	land	around	the	Hab	is	really	flat,	as is	all	of	Acidalia	Planitia.	I	have	no	idea	what	my	efficiency	would	be	on the	nastier	land	en	route	to	Ares	4.
I	could	have	gone	further,	but	I	need	life	support	while	recharging.
The	CO2	gets	absorbed	through	a	chemical	process,	but	if	the	fan	that pushes	it	isn’t	working,	I’ll	choke.	The	oxygen	pump	is	also	kind	of important.
	I	set	up	the	solar	cells.	It	was	hard	work;	last	time	I	had	Vogel’s	help. They	aren’t	heavy,	but	they’re	awkward.	After	setting	up	half	of	them,	I figured	out	I	could	drag	them	rather	than	carry	them	and	that	sped	things up.
Now	I’m	just	waiting	for	the	batteries	to	recharge.	I’m	bored,	so	I’m updating	the	log.	I	have	all	the	Poirot	books	in	my	computer.	That’ll	help.
It’s	going	to	take	12	hours	to	recharge,	after	all.
What’s	that,	you	say?	12	hours	is	wrong?	I	said	13	hours	earlier?
Well,	my	friend,	let	me	set	you	straight.
The	RTG	is	a	generator.	It’s	a	paltry	amount	of	power,	compared	to what	the	rover	consumes,	but	it’s	not	nothing.	It’s	100	Watts.	It’ll	cut	an hour	off	my	total	recharge	time.	Why	not	use	it?
I	wonder	what	NASA	would	think	about	me	....	with	the	RTG like	this.	They’d	probably	hide	under	their	desks	and	cuddle	their	slide-rules	for	comfort.
LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	71
As	predicted,	it	took	12	hours	to	charge	the	batteries	to	full.	I	came straight	home.
Time	to	make	plans	for	Sirius	4.	And	I	think	it’ll	be	a	multi-day	field trip.
Looks	like	power	and	battery	recharging	is	solved.	Food’s	not	a problem;	there’s	plenty	of	space	to	store	things.	Water’s	even	easier	than food.	I	need	2L	per	day	to	be	comfortable.
In	the	long	term,	I’ll	need	to	bring	the	Oxygenator.	But	it’s	big	and	I don’t	want	to	screw	with	it	right	now.	So	I’ll	rely	on	O2	and	CO2	filters for	Sirius	4.
CO2	isn’t	a	problem.	I	started	this	grand	adventure	with	1500	hours	of CO2	filters,	plus	another	720	for	emergency	use.	All	systems	use
standard	filters	(Apollo	13	taught	us	important	lessons).	Since	then,	I’ve used	131	hours	of	filter	on	various	EVAs.	I	have	2089	left.	87	days	worth.
Plenty.
The	rover	was	designed	to	support	3	people	for	2	days,	plus	some reserve	for	safety.	So	its	O2	tanks	can	hold	enough	to	last	me	7	days.	Not enough.
Mars	has	1/90th	Earth’s	atmospheric	pressure.	The	inside	of	the	rover has	1	atmosphere.	So	the	oxygen	tanks	are	on	the	inside	(less	pressure differential	to	deal	with).	Why	does	that	matter?	It	means	I	can	bring along	other	oxygen	tanks,	and	equalize	them	with	the	rover’s	tanks without	having	to	do	an	EVA.
So	today,	I	detached	one	of	the	Hab’s	two	25L	oxygen	tanks	and brought	it	in	to	the	rover.	According	to	NASA,	a	human	needs	588L	of oxygen	per	day	to	live.	Compressed	liquid	O2	is	about	1000	times	as dense	as	gaseous	O2	in	a	comfortable	atmosphere.	Long	story	short:	with the	Hab	tank,	I	have	enough	O2	to	last	42	days.	That’ll	be	plenty.
Sirius	4	will	be	a	20	day	trip.
That	may	seem	a	bit	long,	but	I	have	a	specific	goal	in	mind.	Besides, my	trip	to	Ares	4	will	be	at	least	40	days.	This	is	a	good	scale	model.
	While	I’m	away,	the	Hab	can	take	care	of	itself,	but	the	potatoes	are an	issue.	I’ll		saturate	the	ground	with	most	of	the	water	I	have.	Then,	I’ll deactivate	the	Atmospheric	Regulator,	so	it	doesn’t	pull	water	out	of	the air.	It’ll	be	humid	as	hell,	and	water	will	condense	on	every	surface.
That’ll	keep	the	potatoes	well	watered	while	I’m	away.
A	bigger	problem	is	CO2.	The	potatoes	need	to	breathe.	I	know	what you’re	thinking.	“Mark,	old	chap!	YOU	produce	carbon	dioxide!	It’s	all part	of	the	majestic	circle	of	nature!”
The	problem	is:	Where	will	I	put	it?	Sure,	I	exhale	CO2	with	every breath,	but	I	don’t	have	any	way	to	store	it.	I	could	turn	off	the Oxygenator	and	Atmospheric	Regulator	and	just	fill	the	Hab	with	my breath	over	time.	But	CO2	is	deadly	to	me.	I	need	to	release	a	bunch	at once	and	run	away.
Remember	the	MAV	fuel	plant?	It	collects	CO2	from	the	Martian atmosphere.	My	small	crops	aren’t	nearly	as	needy	as	me,	so	a	10L	tank of	compressed	liquid	CO2,	vented	in	to	the	Hab,	will	be	enough	CO2	to do	the	trick.	That’ll	take	less	than	a	day	to	create.
So	that’s	everything.	Once	I	vent	the	CO2	in	to	the	Hab,	I’ll	turn	off the	Atmospheric	Regulator	and	Oxygenator,	dump	a	ton	of	water	on	the crops,	and	head	out.
Sirius	4.	A	huge	step	forward	in	my	rover	research.	And	I	can	start tomorrow. 
Chapter	8

“Hello,	and	thank	you	for	joining	us,”	Cathy	said	to	the	camera. “Today	on	CNN’s	Mark	Watney	Report:	Several	EVAs	over	the	past	few days…	what	do	they	mean?	What	progress	has	NASA	made	on	a	rescue option?	And	how	will	this	affect	the	Ares	4	preparations?
“Joining	us	today	is	Dr.	Venkat	Kapoor,	Director	of	Mars	Missions for	NASA.	Dr.	Kapoor,	thank	you	for	coming.”
“A	pleasure	to	be	here,	Cathy,”	Venkat	said.
“Dr.	Kapoor,”	Cathy	began,	“Mark	Watney	is	the	most-watched	man in	the	solar	system,	wouldn’t	you	say?”
Venkat	nodded.	“Certainly	the	most	watched	by	NASA.	We	have	all 12	of	our	Martian	satellites	taking	pictures	whenever	his	site’s	in	view.
The	European	Space	Agency	has	both	of	theirs	doing	the	same.”
“All	told,	how	often	do	you	get	these	images?”
“Every	few	minutes.	Sometimes	there’s	a	gap,	based	on	the	satellite orbits.	But	it’s	enough	that	we	can	track	all	his	EVA	activities.”
“Tell	us	about	these	latest	EVAs.”
“Well,”	Venkat	began,	“It	looks	like	he’s	preparing	Rover	2	for	a	long trip.	On	Sol	65,	he	took	the	battery	from	the	other	rover	and	attached	it with	a	homemade	sling.	The	next	day,	he	detached	14	solar	cells	and stacked	them	on	the	rover’s	roof.”
“And	then	he	took	a	little	drive,	didn’t	he?”	Cathy	prompted.
“Yes	he	did.	Sort	of	aimlessly	for	an	hour,	then	back	to	the	Hab.	He was	probably	testing	it.	Next	time	we	saw	him	was	two	days	later,	when he	drove	4km	away,	then	back.	Another	incremental	test,	we	think.	Then, over	the	past	couple	of	days,	he’s	been	stocking	it	up	with	supplies.”
“Hmm,”	Cathy	said,	“Most	analysts	think	Mark’s	only	hope	of	rescue is	to	get	to	the	Ares	4	site.	Do	you	think	he’s	come	to	the	same conclusion?”
“Probably,”	Venkat	said.	“He	doesn’t	know	we’re	watching.	From	his point	of	view,	Ares	4	is	his	only	hope.”
“Do	you	think	he’s	planning	to	go	soon?	He	seems	to	be	getting	ready
for	a	trip.”
“I	hope	not,”	Venkat	said.	“There’s	nothing	at	the	site	other	than	the MAV.	None	of	the	other	presupplies.	It	would	be	a	very	long,	very dangerous	trip,	and	he’d	be	leaving	the	safety	of	the	Hab	behind.”
“Why	would	he	risk	it?”
“Communication,”	Venkat	said.	“Once	he	reaches	the	MAV,	he	could contact	us.”
“So	that	would	be	a	good	thing,	wouldn’t	it?”
“Communication	would	be	a	great	thing.	But	traversing	3,200km	to Ares	4	is	incredibly	dangerous.	We’d	rather	he	stayed	put.	If	we	could talk	to	him,	we’d	certainly	tell	him	that.”
“He	can’t	stay	put	forever,	right?”	she	asked.	“Eventually	he’ll	need to	get	to	the	MAV.”
“Not	necessarily,”	Venkat	said.	“JPL	is	experimenting	with modifications	to	the	MDV	so	it	can	make	a	brief	overland	flight	after landing.”
“I’d	heard	that	idea	was	rejected	as	being	too	dangerous,”	Cathy	said.
“Their	first	proposal	was,	yes.	Since	then,	they’ve	been	working	on safer	ways	to	do	it.”
“With	only	three	and	a	half	years	before	Ares	4’s	scheduled	launch,	is there	enough	time	to	make	and	test	modifications	to	the	MDV?”
“I	can’t	answer	that	for	sure.	But	remember,	we	made	a	lunar	lander from	scratch	in	seven	years.”
“Excellent	point,”	Cathy	smiled.	“So	what	are	his	odds	right	now?”
“No	idea,”	Venkat	said.	“But	we’re	going	to	do	everything	we	can	to bring	him	home	alive.”
“How’d	I	do	today?”	Venkat	asked.
“Eeeh,”	Annie	said.	“You	shouldn’t	say	things	like	‘Bring	him	home alive.’	It	reminds	people	he	might	die.”
“Think	they’re	going	to	forget	that?”
“You	asked	my	opinion.	Don’t	like	it?	Go	....	yourself.”
“You’re	such	a	delicate	flower,	Annie.	How’d	you	end	up	NASA’s Communications	Director?”
“Beats	the	....	out	of	me,”	Annie	said.
“Guys,”	said	Bruce	Ng,	Director	of	JPL.	“I	need	to	catch	a	flight	back to	LA	in	three	hours.	Is	Teddy	coming	or	what?”
“Quit	bitching,	Bruce,”	Annie	said.	“None	of	us	want	to	be	here.”
“So,”	said	Hermes	Flight	Director	Mitch	Henderson	“Who	are	you, again?”
“Um,”	Mindy	said,	“I’m	Mindy	Park.	I	work	in	SatCon.”
“You	a	director	or	something?”
“No,	I	just	work	in	SatCon.	I’m	a	nobody.”
Venkat	looked	to	Mitch	“I	put	her	in	charge	of	tracking	Watney.	She gets	us	the	imagery.”
“Huh,”	said	Mitch.	“Not	the	Director	of	SatCon?”
“Bob’s	got	more	to	deal	with	than	just	Mars.	Mindy’s	handling	all	the
Martian	satellites,	and	keeps	them	pointed	at	Mark.” “Why	Mindy?”	Mitch	asked.
“She	noticed	he	was	alive	in	the	first	place.”
“She	gets	a	promotion	cause	she	was	in	the	hot	seat	when	the	imagery came	through?”
“No,”	Venkat	frowned,	“She	gets	a	promotion	cause	she	figured	out he	was	alive.	Stop	being	a	,	Mitch.	You’re	making	her	feel	bad.”
Mitch	looked	over	to	Mindy.	“Sorry.”
Mindy	looked	at	the	table	and	managed	to	say	“’k.”
Teddy	entered	the	room.	“Sorry	I’m	late.	Let’s	get	started,”	He	took his	seat.	“Venkat,	what’s	Watney’s	status?”
“Alive	and	well,”	Venkat	said.	“No	change	from	my	email	earlier today.”
“What	about	the	RTG.	Does	the	public	know	about	that	yet?”	Teddy asked.
Annie	leaned	forward.	“So	far,	so	good,”	she	said.	“The	images	are public,	but	we	have	no	obligation	to	tell	them	our	analysis.	Nobody	has figured	it	out	yet.”
“Why	did	he	dig	it	up?”
“Heat,	I	think,”	Venkat	said.	“He	wants	to	make	the	rover	do	long trips.	It	uses	a	lot	of	energy	keeping	warm.	The	RTG	can	heat	up	the interior	without	soaking	battery	power.	It’s	a	good	idea,	really.” “How	dangerous	is	it?”	Teddy	asked.
“As	long	as	the	container’s	intact,	no	danger	at	all.	Even	if	it	cracks open	he'll	be	ok	if	the	pellets	inside	don't	break.	But	if	the	pellets	break too,	he’s	a	dead	man.”
“Let’s	hope	that	doesn’t	happen,”	Teddy	said.	“JPL,	how	are	the	MDV plans	coming	along?”
“We	came	up	with	a	plan	a	long	time	ago,”	Bruce	said.	“You	rejected
it.”
“Bruce,”	Teddy	cautioned.
Bruce	sighed.	“The	MDV	wasn’t	made	for	liftoff	and	lateral	flight. Packing	more	fuel	in	doesn’t	help.	We’d	need	a	bigger	engine	and	don’t have	time	to	invent	one.	So	we	need	to	lighten	the	MDV.
“We	have	an	idea.	The	MDV	can	be	its	normal	weight	on	primary descent.	If	we	made	the	heat	shield	and	outer	hull	detachable,	they	could ditch	a	lot	of	weight	after	landing	at	Ares	3,	and	have	a	lighter	ship	for the	traverse	to	Ares	4.	We’re	running	the	numbers	now.”
“Keep	me	posted,”	Teddy	said.	He	turned	to	Mindy.	“Miss	Park.
Welcome	to	the	big	leagues.” “Sir,”	Mindy	said.
“What’s	the	biggest	gap	in	coverage	we	have	on	Watney	right	now?” “Um,”	Mindy	said.	“Once	every	41	hours,	we’ll	have	a	17	minute	gap.
The	orbits	work	out	that	way.”
“You	had	an	immediate	answer,”	Teddy	said.	“Good.”
“Thank	you,	sir.”
“I	want	that	gap	down	to	four	minutes,”	Teddy	said.	“I’m	giving	you total	authority	over	satellite	trajectories	and	orbital	adjustments.	Make	it happen.”
“Yes,	sir,”	Mindy	said,	with	no	idea	how	to	do	it.
Teddy	looked	to	Mitch.	“Mitch,	your	email	said	you	had	something urgent?”
“Yeah,”	Mitch	said.	“How	long	are	we	gonna’	keep	this	from	the	Ares
3	crew?	They	all	think	Watney’s	dead.	It’s	a	huge	drain	on	morale.” Teddy	looked	to	Venkat.
“Mitch,”	Venkat	said.	“We	discussed	this-“
“No,	you	discussed	it,”	Mitch	interrupted.	“They	think	they	lost	a crewmate.	They’re	devastated.”
“And	when	they	find	out	they	abandoned	a	crewmate?”	Venkat	asked,
“Will	they	feel	better	then?”
Mitch	poked	the	table	with	his	finger	“They	deserve	to	know.	You don’t	think	Commander	Lewis	can’t	handle	the	truth?”
“It’s	a	matter	of	morale,”	Venkat	said.	“They	can	concentrate	on getting	home-“
“I	make	that	call,”	Mitch	said.	“I’m	the	one	who	decides	what’s	best for	the	crew.	And	I	say	we	bring	them	up	to	speed.”
After	a	few	moments	of	silence,	all	eyes	turned	to	Teddy.
He	thought	for	a	moment.	“Sorry,	Mitch,	I’m	with	Venkat	on	this one,”	he	said.	“But	as	soon	as	we	come	up	with	a	plan	for	rescue,	we	can tell	Hermes.	There	needs	to	be	some	hope	or	there’s	no	point	in	telling them.”
“Bullshit,”	Mitch	grumbled,	crossing	his	arms.	“Total	bullshit,”
“I	know	you’re	upset,”	Teddy	said	calmly,	“We’ll	make	it	right.	Just as	soon	as	we	have	some	idea	how	to	save	Watney.”
Teddy	let	a	few	seconds	of	calm	pass	before	moving	on.
“Ok,	JPL’s	on	the	rescue	option,”	he	said	with	a	nod	toward	Bruce.
“But	it	would	be	part	of	Ares	4.	How	does	he	stay	alive	till	then?
Venkat?”
Venkat	opened	a	folder	and	glanced	at	the	paperwork	inside.	“I	had every	team	check	and	double-check	the	longevity	of	their	systems.	We’re pretty	sure	the	Hab	can	keep	working	for	4	years.	Especially	with	a human	occupant	fixing	problems	as	they	arise.	But	there’s	no	way	around the	food	issue.	He’ll	start	starving	in	a	year.	We	have	to	send	him supplies.	Simple	as	that.”
“What	about	an	Ares	4	presupply?”	Said	Teddy.	“Land	it	at	Ares	3 instead.”
“That’s	what	we’re	thinking,	yeah,”	Venkat	confirmed.	“Problem	is, the	original	plan	was	to	launch	presupplies	a	year	from	now.	They’re	not ready	yet.
“It	takes	8	months	to	get	a	probe	to	Mars	in	the	best	of	times.	The positions	of	Earth	and	Mars	right	now…	it’s	not	the	best	of	times.	We figure	we	can	get	there	in	9	months.	Presuming	he’s	rationing	his	food, he’s	got	enough	to	last	350	more	days.	That	means	we	need	to	build	a presupply	in	three	months.	JPL	hasn’t	even	started	yet.”
“That’ll	be	tight,”	Bruce	said.	“Making	a	presupply	is	a	6	month process.	We’re	set	up	to	pipeline	a	bunch	of	them	at	once,	not	to	make one	in	a	hurry.”
“Sorry,	Bruce,”	Teddy	said.	“I	know	we’re	asking	a	lot,	but	you	have to	find	a	way.”
“We’ll	find	a	way,”	Bruce	said.	“But	the	OT	alone	will	be	a nightmare.”
“Get	started.	I’ll	find	you	the	money.”
“There’s	also	the	booster,”	Venkat	said.	“The	only	way	to	get	a	probe to	Mars	with	the	planets	in	their	current	positions	is	to	spend	a	butt-load of	fuel.	We	only	have	one	booster	capable	of	doing	that.	The	Delta	IX that’s	on	the	pad	right	now	for	the	EagleEye	3	Saturn	probe.	We’ll	have to	steal	that.	I	talked	to	ULA,	and	they	just	can’t	make	another	booster	in time.”
“The	EagleEye	3	team	will	be	pissed,	but	ok,”	said	Teddy.	“We	can delay	their	mission	if	JPL	gets	the	payload	done	in	time.” Bruce	rubbed	his	eyes.	“We’ll	do	our	best.” “He’ll	starve	to	death	if	you	don’t,”	Teddy	said.

Venkat	sipped	his	coffee	and	frowned	at	his	computer.	A	month	ago	it would	have	been	unthinkable	to	drink	coffee	at	9pm.	Now	it	was necessary	fuel.	Shift	schedules,	fund	allocations,	project	juggling,	out	and out	looting	of	other	projects…	he’d	never	pulled	so	many	stunts	in	his life.
“NASA’s	a	large	organization,”	he	typed.	“It	doesn’t	deal	with	sudden change	well.	The	only	reason	we’re	getting	away	with	it	is	the	desperate circumstances.	Everyone’s	pulling	together	to	save	Mark	Watney,	with	no interdepartmental	squabbling.	I	can’t	tell	you	how	rare	that	is.	Even	then, this	is	going	to	cost	tens	of	millions,	maybe	hundreds	of	millions	of dollars.	The	MDV	modifications	alone	are	an	entire	project	that’s	being staffed	up.	Hopefully,	the	public	interest	will	make	your	job	easier.	We appreciate	your	continued	support,	Congressman,	and	hope	you	can	sway the	Committee	toward	granting	us	the	emergency	funding	we	need.” He	was	interrupted	by	a	knock	at	his	door.	Looking	up,	he	saw	Mindy.
“Sorry	to	bother	you,”	Mindy	said.
“No	bother,”	Venkat	said.	“I	could	use	a	break.	What’s	up?” “He’s	on	the	move,”	she	said.
Venkat	slouched	in	his	chair.	“Any	chance	it’s	a	test	drive?”
She	shook	her	head.	“He	drove	straight	away	from	the	Hab	for	almost two	hours,	did	a	short	EVA,	then	drove	for	another	two.	We	think	the
EVA	was	to	change	batteries.”
Venkat	sighed	heavily.	“Maybe	it’s	just	a	longer	test?	An	overnight trip,	kind	of	thing?”
“He’s	76km	from	the	Hab,”	Mindy	said.	“For	an	overnight	test, wouldn’t	he	stay	within	walking	distance?”
“Yes	he	would,”	Venkat	said.	“Damn	it.	We’ve	had	teams	run	every conceivable	scenario.	There’s	just	no	way	he	can	make	it	to	Ares	4	with that	set-up.	We	never	saw	him	load	up	the	Oxygenator	or	Water Reclaimer.	He	can’t	possibly	have	enough	basics	to	live	long	enough.”
“I	don’t	think	he’s	going	to	Ares	4,”	Mindy	said.	“If	he	is,	he’s	taking a	weird	path.”
“Oh?”	said	Venkat.
“He	went	south-southwest.	Schiaparelli	Crater	is	southeast.”
“Ok,	maybe	there’s	hope,”	Venkat	said.	“What’s	he	doing	right	now?”
“Recharging.	He’s	got	all	the	solar	cells	set	up,”	Mindy	said.	“Last time	he	did	that,	it	took	12	hours.	I	was	going	to	sneak	home	for	some sleep	if	that’s	ok.”
“Sure,	sounds	good.	We’ll	see	what	he	does	tomorrow.	Maybe	he’ll go	back	to	the	Hab.”
“Maybe,”	Mindy	said,	unconvinced.

“Welcome	back,”	Cathy	said	to	the	camera.	“We’re	chatting	with
Marcus	Washington,	from	the	US	Postal	Service.	So,	Mr.	Washington,	I understand	the	Ares	3	mission	caused	a	Postal	Service	first.	Can	you explain	to	our	viewers?”
“Uh	yeah,”	said	Marcus.	“Everyone	thought	he	was	dead	for	over	two months.	In	that	time,	the	Postal	Service	issued	a	run	of	commemorative stamps	honoring	his	memory.	20,000	were	printed,	and	sent	to	post offices	around	the	country.”
“And	then	it	turned	out	he	was	alive,”	Cathy	said.
“Yeah,”	said	Marcus.	“We	stopped	the	run	immediately	and	recalled the	stamps,	but	thousands	were	already	sold.	The	thing	is,	we	don’t	print stamps	of	living	people.”
“Has	this	ever	happened	before?”	Cathy	asked.
“No.	Not	once	in	the	history	of	the	Postal	Service.”
“I	bet	they’re	worth	a	pretty	penny	now.”
Marcus	chuckled.	“Maybe.	But	not	too	much.	Like	I	said,	thousands were	sold.	They’ll	be	rare,	but	not	super	rare.”
Cathy	chuckled	then	addressed	the	camera.	“We’ve	been	speaking with	Marcus	Washington	of	the	United	States	Postal	Service.	If	you’ve got	a	Mark	Watney	commemorative	stamp,	you	might	want	to	hold	on	to it.	Thanks	for	dropping	by,	Mr.	Washington.” “Thanks	for	having	me,”	Marcus	said.
“Our	next	guest	is	Dr.	Irene	Shields,	Flight	Psychologist	for	the	Ares missions.	Dr.	Shields,	welcome	to	the	program.”
“Thank	you,”	Irene	said,	adjusting	her	microphone	clip.
“Do	you	know	Mark	Watney	personally?”
“Of	course,”	Irene	said.	“I	did	monthly	psych	evaluations	on	each member	of	the	crew.”
“What	can	you	tell	us	about	him?	His	personality,	his	mindset?” “Well,”	Irene	said,	“He’s	very	intelligent.	All	of	them	are,	of	course.
But	he’s	particularly	resourceful	and	a	good	problem-solver.” “That	may	save	his	life,”	Cathy	interjected.
“It	may	indeed,”	Irene	agreed.	“Also,	he’s	a	good-natured	man. Usually	cheerful,	with	a	great	sense	of	humor.	He’s	quick	with	a	joke.	In the	months	leading	up	to	launch,	the	crew	was	put	through	a	grueling training	schedule.	They	all	showed	signs	of	stress	and	moodiness.	Mark was	no	exception,	but	the	way	he	showed	it	was	to	crack	more	jokes	and get	everyone	laughing.”
“He	sounds	like	a	great	guy,”	Cathy	said.
“He	really	is,”	Irene	said.	“He	was	chosen	for	the	mission	in	part because	of	his	personality.	An	Ares	crew	has	to	spend	13	months together.	Social	compatibility	is	key.	Mark	not	only	fits	well	in	any	social group,	he’s	a	catalyst	to	make	the	group	work	better.	It	was	a	terrible blow	to	the	crew	when	he	‘died.’”
“And	they	still	think	he’s	dead,	right?	The	Ares	3	crew?”
“Yes	they	do,	unfortunately,”	Irene	confirmed.	“The	higher-ups decided	to	keep	it	from	them,	at	least	for	now.	I’m	sure	it	wasn’t	an	easy decision.”
	Cathy	paused	for	a	moment,	then	said.	“All	right.	You	know	I	have	to ask:	What’s	going	through	his	head	right	now?	How	does	a	man	like Mark	Watney	respond	to	a	situation	like	this?	Stranded,	alone,	no	idea we’re	trying	to	help?”
“There’s	no	way	to	be	sure,”	Irene	said.	“The	biggest	threat	is	giving up	hope.	If	he	decides	there’s	no	chance	to	survive,	he’ll	stop	trying.”
“Then	we’re	ok	for	now,	right?”	Cathy	said.	“He	seems	to	be	working hard.	He’s	prepping	the	rover	for	a	long	trip	and	testing	it.	He	plans	to	be there	when	Ares	4	lands.”
“That’s	one	interpretation,	yes,”	Irene	said.
“Is	there	another?”
Irene	carefully	formed	her	answer	before	speaking.	“When	facing death,	people	want	to	be	heard.	They	don’t	want	to	die	alone.	He	might just	want	the	MAV	radio	so	he	can	talk	to	another	soul	before	he	dies.
“If	he’s	lost	hope,	he	won’t	care	about	survival.	His	only	concern	will be	making	it	to	the	radio.	After	that,	he’ll	probably	take	an	easier	way	out than	starvation.	The	medical	supplies	of	an	Ares	mission	have	enough morphine	to	be	lethal.”
After	several	seconds	of	complete	silence	in	the	studio,	Cathy	turned to	the	camera.	“We’ll	be	right	back.”

“Heya,	Venk,”	came	Bruce’s	voice	from	the	speakerphone.
“Bruce,	Hi,”	said	Venkat.	“Thanks	for	clearing	up	some	time.	I wanted	to	talk	about	the	presupply.”
“Sure	thing.	What’s	on	your	mind?”
“Let’s	say	we	soft-land	it	perfectly.	How	will	Mark	know	it happened?	And	how	will	he	know	where	to	look?”
“We’ve	been	thinking	about	that,”	said	Bruce.	“We’ve	got	some ideas.”
“I’m	all	ears,”	Venkat	said.
“We’ll	be	sending	him	a	comm	system	anyway,	right?	We	could	have it	turn	on	after	lading.	It’ll	broadcast	on	the	rover	and	EVA	suit frequencies.	It’ll	have	to	be	a	strong	signal,	too.
“The	rovers	were	only	designed	to	communicate	with	the	Hab	and each	other;	the	signal	origin	was	presumed	to	be	within	20km.	The receivers	just	aren’t	very	sensitive.	The	EVA	suits	are	even	worse.	But	as long	as	we	have	a	strong	signal	we	should	be	good.
“Once	we	land	the	presupply,	we’ll	get	its	exact	location	from satellites,	then	broadcast	that	to	Mark	so	he	can	go	get	it.”
“But	he’s	probably	not	listening,”	said	Venkat.	“Why	would	he	be?”
“We	have	a	plan	for	that.	We’re	going	to	make	a	bunch	of	bright green	ribbons.	Light	enough	to	flutter	around	when	dropped,	even	in Mars’s	atmosphere.	Each	ribbon	will	have	‘MARK:	TURN	ON	YOUR COMM’	printed	on	it.	We’re	working	on	a	release	mechanism	now. During	the	landing	sequence,	of	course.	Ideally,	about	1000	meters	above the	surface.”
“I	like	it,”	Venkat	said.	“All	he	needs	to	do	is	notice	one.	And	he’s sure	to	check	out	a	bright	green	ribbon	if	he	sees	one	outside.” “That’s	what	we’re	thinking,”	said	Bruce.
“All	right,	good	work.	Keep	me	posted,”	Venkat	said.
“Venk,”	said	Bruce.	“If	he	takes	the	‘Watneymobile’	to	Ares	4,	this’ll all	be	for	nothing.	I	mean,	we	can	land	it	at	Ares	4	if	that	happens,	but…”
“But	he’ll	be	without	a	Hab.	Yeah,”	Venkat	said.	“One	thing	at	a	time. Let	me	know	when	you	come	up	with	a	release	mechanism	for	those ribbons.”
“Will	do.”
After	terminating	the	call,	he	saw	an	email	from	Mindy	Park	arrive. “Watney’s	on	the	move	again.”

“Still	going	in	a	straight	line,”	Mindy	said,	pointing	to	her	monitor.
“I	see,”	Venkat	said.	“He’s	sure	as	hell	not	going	to	Ares	4.	Unless he’s	going	around	some	natural	obstacle.”
“There’s	nothing	for	him	to	go	around,”	Mindy	said.	“It’s	Acidalia
Planitia.”
“Are	those	the	solar	cells?”	Venkat	asked,	pointing	to	the	screen.
“Yeah,”	Mindy	said.	“He	did	the	usual	2	hour	drive,	EVA,	2	hour drive.	He’s	156km	from	the	Hab	now.” They	both	peered	at	the	screen.
“Wait…”	Venkat	said.	“Wait,	no	way…” “What?”	Mindy	asked.
Venkat	grabbed	a	pad	of	Post-Its	and	a	pen.	“Give	me	his	location, and	the	location	of	the	Hab.”
Mindy	checked	her	screen.	“He’s	currently	at…	28.9°N,	29.6°W.”
With	a	few	keystrokes,	she	brought	up	another	file.	“The	Hab’s	at	31.2°N, 28.5°W.	What	do	you	see?”
Venkat	finished	taking	down	the	numbers.	“Come	with	me,”	he	said, quickly	walking	out.
“Um,”	Mindy	stammered,	following	after.	“Where	are	we	going?” She	asked	when	she	caught	up.
“SatCon	break	room,”	Venkat	said.	“You	guys	still	have	that	map	of
Mars	on	the	wall?”
“Sure,”	Mindy	said.	“But	it’s	just	a	poster	from	the	gift	shop.	I’ve	got high	quality	digital	maps	on	my	computer-“
“Nope.	I	can’t	draw	on	those,”	he	said.	Then,	rounding	the	corner	to the	break	room,	he	pointed	to	the	Mars	map	on	the	wall.	“I	can	draw	on that.”
The	break	room	was	empty	save	a	computer	technician	sipping	a	cup of	coffee.	The	urgency	of	Venkat	and	Mindy’s	entrance	caught	his attention.
“Good,	it	has	latitude	and	longitude	lines,”	Venkat	said.	Looking	at
his	Post-It,	then	sliding	his	finger	along	the	map,	he	drew	an	X.	“That’s the	Hab,”	he	said.
“Hey,”	the	technician	said.	“Are	you	drawing	on	our	poster?”
“I’ll	buy	you	a	new	one,”	Venkat	said	without	looking	back.	Then,	he drew	another	X.	“That’s	his	current	location.	Get	me	a	ruler.”
Mindy	looked	left	and	right.	Seeing	no	ruler,	she	grabbed	the technicians	notebook.
“Hey!”	The	technician	protested.
Using	the	notebook	as	a	straight-edge,	Venkat	drew	a	line	from	the Hab	to	Mark’s	location	and	beyond.	Then	took	a	step	back.
“Yup!	That’s	where	he’s	going!”	Venkat	said	excitedly.
“Oh!”	Mindy	said.
The	line	passed	through	the	exact	center	of	a	bright	yellow	dot	printed on	the	map.
“Pathfinder!”	Mindy	said.	“He’s	going	to	Pathfinder!”
“Yup!”	Venkat	said.	“Now	we’re	getting	somewhere.	It’s	like	800km from	him.	He	can	get	there	and	back	with	supplies	on-hand.”
“And	bring	Pathfinder	and	Sojourner	Rover	back	with	him,”	Mindy added.
Venkat	quickly	pulled	out	his	cell	phone.	“We	lost	contact	with	it	in 1997.	If	he	can	get	it	online	again,	we	can	communicate.	It	might	just need	the	solar	cells	cleaned.	Even	if	it’s	got	a	bigger	problem,	he’s	an engineer!”	Dialing,	he	added	“Fixing	shit	is	his	job!”
Smiling	for	the	first	time	in	weeks,	he	held	the	phone	to	his	ear	and awaited	a	response.	“Bruce?	It’s	Venkat.	Everything	just	changed. Watney’s	headed	for	Pathfinder.	Yeah!	I	know,	right!?	Dig	up	everyone who	was	on	that	project	and	get	them	to	JPL	now.	I’ll	catch	the	next flight.”
Hanging	up,	he	grinned	at	the	map.	“Mark,	you	sneaky,	clever,	son	of a	bitch!”


Chapter	9
LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	79
It’s	the	evening	of	my	8th	day	on	the	road.	“Sirius	4”	has	been	a success	so	far.
I’ve	fallen	in	to	a	routine.	Every	morning	I	wake	up	at	dawn.	First thing	I	do	is	check	oxygen	and	CO2	levels.	Then	I	eat	a	breakfast	pack and	drink	a	cup	of	water.	After	that,	I	brush	my	teeth,	using	as	little	water as	possible,	and	shave	with	an	electric	razor.
The	rover	has	no	toilet.	We	were	expected	to	use	our	suits’ reclamation	systems	for	that.	But	they	aren’t	designed	to	hold	twenty days	worth	of	output.
My	morning	piss	goes	in	a	resealable	plastic	box.	When	I	open	it,	the rover	reeks	like	a	truck-stop	men’s	room.	I	could	take	it	outside	and	let	it boil	off.	But	I	worked	hard	to	make	that	water,	and	the	last	thing	I’m going	to	do	is	waste	it.	I’ll	feed	it	to	the	Water	Reclaimer	when	I	get back.
Even	more	precious	is	my	manure.	It’s	critical	to	the	potato	farm	and I’m	the	only	source	on	Mars.	Fortunately,	when	you	spend	a	lot	of	time	in space,	you	learn	how	to	shit	in	a	bag.	And	if	you	think	things	are	bad	after opening	the	piss	box,	imagine	the	smell	after	I	drop	anchor.
Then	I	go	outside	and	collect	the	solar	cells.	Why	didn’t	I	do	it	the previous	night?	Because	trying	to	dismantle	and	stack	solar	cells	in	total ....	darkness	isn’t	fun.	I	learned	that	the	hard	way.
After	securing	the	cells,	I	come	back	in,	turn	on	some	shitty	‘70’s music,	and	start	driving.	I	putter	along	at	25kph,	the	rover’s	top	speed. It’s	comfortable	inside.	I	wear	hastily	made	cut-offs	and	a	thin	shirt	while the	RTG	bakes	the	interior.	When	it	gets	too	hot	I	detach	the	insulation duct-taped	to	the	hull.	When	it	gets	too	cold,	I	tape	it	back	up.
I	can	go	almost	2	hours	before	the	battery	runs	out.	I	do	a	quick	EVA to	swap	cables,	then	I’m	back	at	the	wheel	for	the	second	half	of	the	day’s drive.
The	terrain	is	very	flat.	The	undercarriage	of	the	rover	is	taller	than any	of	the	rocks	around	here,	and	the	hills	are	gently-sloping	affairs, smoothed	by	eons	of	sandstorms.
When	the	other	battery	runs	out,	it’s	time	for	another	EVA.	I	pull	the solar	cells	off	the	roof	and	lay	them	on	the	ground.	For	the	first	few	sols, I	lined	them	up	in	a	row.	Now	I	plop	them	wherever,	trying	to	keep	them close	to	the	rover	out	of	sheer	laziness.
Then	comes	the	incredibly	dull	part	of	my	day.	I	sit	around	for	12 hours	with	nothing	to	do.	And	I’m	getting	sick	of	this	rover.	The	inside’s the	size	of	a	van.	That	may	seem	like	plenty	of	room,	but	try	being trapped	in	a	van	for	8	days.	I	look	forward	to	tending	my	potato	farm	in the	wide	open	space	of	the	Hab.
I’m	nostalgic	for	the	Hab.	How	....	up	is	that?
I	have	shitty	‘70’s	TV	to	watch,	and	a	bunch	of	Poirot	novels.	But mostly	I	spend	my	time	thinking	about	getting	to	Ares	4.	I’ll	have	to	do	it someday.	How	the	hell	am	I	going	to	survive	a	3,200km	trip	in	this	thing? It’ll	probably	take	50	days.	I’ll	need	the	Water	Reclaimer	and	the Oxygenator,	maybe	some	of	the	Hab’s	main	batteries,	then	a	bunch	more solar	cells	to	charge	everything…	where	will	I	put	it	all?	These	thoughts pester	me	throughout	the	long	boring	days.
Eventually,	it	gets	dark	and	I	get	tired.	I	lay	among	the	food	packs, water	tanks,	extra	O2	tank,	piles	of	CO2	filters,	box	of	pee,	bags	of	shit, and	personal	items.	I	have	a	bunch	of	crew	jumpsuits	to	serve	as	bedding, along	with	my	blanket	and	pillow.	Basically,	I	sleep	in	a	pile	of	junk every	night.
Speaking	of	sleep…	G’night.
LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	80
By	my	reckoning,	I’m	about	100km	from	Pathfinder.	Technically	it’s “Carl	Sagan	Memorial	Station.”	But	with	all	due	respect	to	Carl,	I	can call	it	whatever	the	hell	I	want.	I’m	the	King	of	Mars.
As	I	mentioned,	it’s	been	a	long,	boring	drive.	And	I’m	still	on	the outward	leg.	But	hey,	I’m	an	astronaut.	Long-ass	trips	are	my	business.
Navigation	is	tricky.
The	Hab’s	nav	beacon	only	reaches	40km,	then	it’s	too	faint.	I	knew that’d	be	an	issue	when	I	was	planning	this	little	road	trip,	so	I	came	up with	a	brilliant	plan	that	didn’t	work.
The	computer	has	detailed	maps,	so	I	figured	I	could	navigate	by landmarks.	I	was	wrong.	Turns	out	you	can’t	navigate	by	landmarks	if you	can’t	find	any	god	damned	landmarks.
Our	landing	site	is	at	the	delta	of	a	long-gone	river.	If	there	are	any microscopic	fossils	to	be	had,	it’s	a	good	place	to	look.	Also,	the	water would	have	dragged	rock	and	soil	samples	from	thousands	of	kilometers away.	With	some	digging,	we	could	get	a	broad	geological	history.
That’s	great	for	science,	but	it	means	the	Hab’s	in	a	featureless wasteland.
I	considered	making	a	compass.	The	rover	has	plenty	of	electricity and	the	med	kit	has	a	needle.	Only	one	problem:	Mars	doesn’t	have	a magnetic	field.
So	I	navigate	by	Phobos.	It	whips	around	Mars	so	fast	it	actually	rises and	sets	twice	a	day,	running	west	to	east.	It’s	isn’t	the	most	accurate system,	but	it	works.
Things	got	easier	on	Sol	75.	I	reached	a	valley	with	a	rise	to	the	west. It	had	flat	ground	for	easy	driving,	and	I	just	needed	to	follow	the	edge	of the	hills.	I	named	it	“Lewis	Valley”	after	our	fearless	leader.	She’d	love	it there,	geology	nerd	that	she	is.
Three	sols	later,	Lewis	Valley	opened	into	a	wide	plain.	So,	again,	I was	left	without	references	and	relied	on	Phobos	to	guide	me.	There’s probably	symbolism	there.	Phobos	is	the	god	of	fear,	and	I’m	letting	it	be my	guide.	Not	a	good	sign.
But	today,	my	luck	finally	changed.	After	two	sols	wandering	the desert,	I	found	something	to	navigate	by.	It	was	a	5km	crater,	so	small	it didn’t	even	have	a	listed	name.	But	to	me,	it	was	the	Lighthouse	of Alexandria.	Once	I	had	it	in	sight,	I	knew	exactly	where	I	was.
I’m	camped	near	it	now,	as	a	matter	of	fact.
I’m	finally	through	the	blank	areas	of	the	map.	Tomorrow,	I’ll	have
the	Lighthouse	to	navigate	by,	and	Hamelin	crater	later	on.	I’m	in	good shape.
Now,	on	to	my	next	task:	Sitting	around	with	nothing	to	do	for	12 hours.
I	better	get	started!


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	81

Almost	made	it	to	Pathfinder	today,	but	I	ran	out	of	juice.	Just	another 22km	to	go!
An	unremarkable	drive.	Navigation	wasn’t	a	problem.	As	Lighthouse receded	into	the	distance,	the	rim	of	Hamelin	Crater	came	in	to	view.
I	left	Acidalia	Planitia	behind	a	long	time	ago.	I’m	well	into	Ares Vallis	now.	The	desert	plains	are	giving	way	to	bumpier	terrain,	strewn with	ejecta	that	never	got	buried	by	sand.	It	makes	driving	a	chore;	I	have to	pay	more	attention.
Up	till	now,	I’ve	been	driving	right	over	the	rock-strewn	landscape. But	as	I	travel	further	south,	the	rocks	are	getting	bigger	and	more plentiful.	I	have	to	go	around	some	of	them	or	risk	damage	to	my suspension.	The	good	news	is	I	don’t	have	to	do	it	for	long.	Once	I	get	to Pathfinder,	I	can	turn	around	and	go	the	other	way.
The	weather’s	been	very	good.	No	discernible	wind,	no	storms.	I	think I	got	lucky	there.	There’s	a	good	chance	my	rover	tracks	from	the	past few	sols	are	intact.	I	should	be	able	to	get	back	to	Lewis	Valley	just	by following	them.
After	setting	up	the	solar	panels,	I	went	for	a	little	walk.	I	never	left sight	of	the	rover;	the	last	thing	I	want	to	do	is	get	lost	on	foot.	But	I couldn’t	stomach	crawling	back	into	that	cramped,	smelly	rat’s	nest.	Not right	away.
It’s	a	strange	feeling.	Everywhere	I	go,	I’m	the	first.	Step	outside	the rover?	First	guy	ever	to	be	there!	Climb	a	hill?	First	guy	to	climb	that hill!	Kick	a	rock?	That	rock	hadn’t	moved	in	a	million	years!
I’m	the	first	guy	to	drive	long-distance	on	Mars.	The	first	guy	to
spend	more	than	31	sols	on	Mars.	The	first	guy	to	grow	crops	on	Mars.
First,	first,	first!
I	wasn’t	expecting	to	be	first	at	anything.	I	was	the	5th	crewman	out	of the	MDV	when	we	landed,	making	me	the	17th	person	to	set	foot	on	Mars. The	egress	order	had	been	determined	years	earlier.	A	month	before launch,	we	all	got	tattoos	of	our	“Mars	Numbers.”	Johanssen	almost refused	to	get	her	“15”	because	she	was	afraid	it	would	hurt.	Here’s	a woman	who	had	survived	the	centrifuge,	the	vomit	comet,	hard	landing drills	and	10k	runs.	A	woman	who	fixed	a	simulated	MDV	computer failure	while	being	spun	around	upside-down.	But	she	was	afraid	of	a tattoo	needle.
Man,	I	miss	those	guys.
I’m	the	first	person	to	be	alone	on	an	entire	planet.
Ok,	enough	moping.	Tomorrow,	I’ll	be	the	first	person	to	recover	a Mars	probe.


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	82

Victory!	I	found	it!
I	knew	I	was	in	the	right	area	when	I	spotted	Twin	Peaks	in	the distance.	The	two	small	hills	are	under	a	kilometer	from	the	landing	site. Even	better,	they	were	on	the	far	side	of	the	site.	All	I	had	to	do	was	aim for	them	until	I	found	the	Lander.
And	there	it	was!	Right	where	it	was	supposed	to	be!
Pathfinder’s	final	stage	of	descent	was	a	balloon-covered	tetrahedron. The	balloons	absorbed	the	impact	of	landing.	Once	it	came	to	rest,	they deflated	and	the	tetrahedron	unfolded	to	reveal	the	probe.
It’s	actually	two	separate	components.	The	Lander	itself,	and	the Sojourner	rover.	The	Lander	was	immobile,	while	Sojourner	wandered around	and	got	a	good	look	at	the	local	rocks.	I’m	taking	both	back	with me,	but	the	important	part	is	the	Lander.	That’s	the	part	that	can communicate	with	Earth.
I	excitedly	stumbled	out	and	rushed	to	the	site.
I	can’t	explain	how	happy	I	was.	It	was	a	lot	of	work	to	get	here,	and I’d	succeeded.
The	Lander	was	half	buried.	With	some	quick	and	careful	digging,	I exposed	the	bulk	of	it,	though	the	large	tetrahedron	and	the	deflated balloons	still	lurked	below	the	surface.
After	a	quick	search,	I	found	Sojourner.	The	little	fella	was	only	two meters	from	the	Lander.	I	vaguely	remember	it	was	further	away	when they	last	saw	it.	It	probably	entered	a	contingency	mode	and	started circling	the	Lander,	trying	to	communicate.
I	quickly	deposited	Sojourner	in	my	rover.	It’s	small,	light,	and	easily fit	in	the	airlock.	The	Lander	was	a	different	story.
I	had	no	hope	of	getting	the	whole	thing	back	to	the	Hab.	It	was	just too	big.	It	was	time	for	me	to	put	on	my	mechanical	engineer	hat.
The	probe	was	attached	to	the	central	panel	of	the	unfolded tetrahedron.	The	other	three	sides	were	each	attached	with	a	metal	hinge. As	anyone	at	JPL	will	tell	you,	probes	are	delicate	things.	Weight	is	a serious	concern,	so	they’re	not	made	to	stand	up	to	much	punishment.
When	I	took	a	crowbar	to	the	hinges,	they	popped	right	off!
Then	things	got	difficult.	When	I	tried	to	lift	the	central	panel assembly,	it	didn’t	budge.
Just	like	the	other	three	panels,	the	central	panel	had	deflated	balloons underneath	it.
Over	the	decades,	the	balloons	had	ripped	and	filled	with	sand.
I	could	cut	off	the	balloons,	but	I’d	have	to	dig	to	get	to	them.	It wouldn’t	be	hard,	it’s	just	sand.	But	the	other	three	panels	were	in	the damn	way.
I	quickly	realized	I	didn’t	give	a	crap	about	the	condition	of	the	other panels.	I	went	back	to	my	rover,	cut	some	strips	of	Hab	material,	then braided	them	in	to	a	primitive	but	strong	rope.	I	can’t	take	credit	for	it being	strong.	Thank	NASA	for	that.	I	just	made	it	rope-shaped.
I	tied	one	end	to	a	panel,	and	the	other	to	the	rover.	The	rover	was made	for	traversing	extremely	rugged	terrain,	often	at	steep	angles.	It may	not	be	fast,	but	it	has	great	torque.	I	towed	the	panel	away	like	a redneck	removing	a	tree	stump.
Now	I	had	a	place	to	dig.	As	I	exposed	each	balloon,	I	cut	it	off.	The whole	task	took	an	hour.
Then	I	hoisted	the	central	panel	assembly	up	and	carried	it confidently	to	the	rover!
At	least,	that’s	what	I	wanted	to	do.	The	damn	thing	is	still	heavy	as hell.	I’m	guessing	it’s	200kg.	Even	in	Mar's	gravity	that's	a	bit	much.	I could	carry	it	around	the	Hab	easily	enough,	but	lifting	it	while	wearing an	awkward	EVA	suit?	Out	of	the	question.
So	I	dragged	it	to	the	rover.
Now	for	my	next	feat:	Getting	it	on	the	roof.
The	roof	was	empty	at	the	moment.	Even	with	mostly-full	batteries,	I had	set	up	the	solar	cells	when	I	stopped.	Why	not?	Free	energy.
I’d	worked	it	out	in	advance.	On	the	way	here,	two	stacks	of	solar panels	occupied	the	whole	roof.	On	the	way	back,	they	would	be	a	single stack.	It’s	a	little	more	dangerous;	they	might	fall	over.	The	main	thing	it they’ll	be	a	pain	in	the	ass	to	stack	that	high.
I	can’t	just	throw	a	rope	over	the	rover	and	hoist	Pathfinder	up	the side.	I	don’t	want	to	break	it.	I	mean,	it’s	already	broken,	they	lost contact	in	1997.	But	I	don’t	want	to	break	it	more.
I	came	up	with	a	solution,	but	I’d	done	enough	physical	labor	for	one day,	and	I	was	almost	out	of	daylight.
Now	I’m	in	the	rover,	looking	at	Sojourner.	It	seems	all	right.	No physical	damage	on	the	outside.	Doesn’t	look	like	anything	got	too	baked by	the	sunlight.	The	dense	layer	of	Mars	crap	all	over	it	protected	it	from long-term	solar	damage.
You	may	think	Sojourner	isn’t	much	use	to	me.	It	can’t	communicate with	Earth.	Why	do	I	care	about	it?
Because	it	has	a	lot	of	moving	parts.
If	I	establish	a	link	with	NASA,	I	can	talk	to	them	by	holding	a	page of	text	up	to	the	Lander’s	camera.	But	how	would	they	talk	to	me?	The only	moving	parts	on	the	Lander	are	the	high	gain	antenna	(which	would have	to	stay	pointed	at	Earth)	and	the	camera	boom.	We’d	have	to	come up	with	a	system	where	NASA	could	talk	by	rotating	the	camera	head.	It would	be	painfully	slow.
But	Sojourner	has	six	independent	wheels	that	rotate	reasonably	fast. It’ll	be	much	easier	to	communicate	with	those.	If	nothing	else,	I	could draw	letters	on	the	wheels,	and	hold	a	mirror	up	to	its	camera.	NASA’d figure	it	out	and	start	spelling	things	at	me.
That	all	assumes	I	can	get	the	Lander’s	radio	working	at	all.
Time	to	turn	in.	I’ve	got	a	lot	of	backbreaking	physical	labor	to	do tomorrow.	I’ll	need	my	rest.


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	83

Oh	god	I’m	sore.
But	it’s	the	only	way	I	could	think	of	to	get	the	Lander	safely	on	to the	roof.
I	built	a	ramp	out	of	rocks	and	sand.	Just	like	the	ancient	Egyptians did.
And	if	there’s	one	thing	Ares	Vallis	has,	it’s	rocks!
First,	I	experimented	to	find	out	how	steep	the	grade	could	be.	Piling up	some	rocks	near	the	Lander,	I	dragged	it	up	the	pile,	then	down	again. Then	I	made	it	steeper,	etc.	I	figured	out	I	could	pull	it	up	a	30	degree grade.	Anything	more	was	too	risky.	I	might	lose	my	grip	and	send	the Lander	tumbling	down	the	ramp.
The	roof	of	the	rover	is	over	2	meters	from	the	ground.	So	I’d	need	a ramp	almost	4	meters	long.	I	got	to	work.
The	first	few	rocks	were	easy.	Then	they	started	feeling	heavier	and heavier.	Hard	physical	labor	in	a	spacesuit	is	murder.	Everything’s	more effort	because	you’re	lugging	20kg	of	suit	around	with	you,	and	your movement	is	limited.	I	was	panting	within	20	minutes.
So	I	cheated.	I	upped	my	O2	mixture.	It	really	helped	a	lot.	Probably shouldn’t	make	that	a	habit.	Also,	I	didn’t	get	hot.	The	suit	leaks	heat faster	than	my	body	could	ever	generate	it.	The	heating	system	is	what keeps	the	temperature	bearable.	My	physical	labor	just	meant	the	suit didn’t	have	to	heat	itself	as	much.
After	hours	of	grueling	labor,	I	finally	got	the	ramp	made.	Nothing
more	than	a	pile	of	rocks	against	the	rover,	but	it	reached	the	roof.
I	stomped	up	and	down	the	ramp	first,	to	make	sure	it	was	stable,	then I	dragged	the	Lander	up.	It	worked	like	a	charm!
I	was	all	smiles	as	I	lashed	the	Lander	in	place.	I	made	sure	it	was firmly	secured,	and	even	stacked	the	solar	cells	in	a	big	single	stack	(why waste	the	ramp?).
But	then	it	hit	me.	The	ramp	would	collapse	as	I	drove	away,	and	the rocks	might	damage	the	wheels	or	undercarriage.	I’d	have	to	take	the ramp	apart	to	keep	that	from	happening.
Ugh.
Tearing	the	ramp	down	was	easier	than	putting	it	up.	I	didn’t	need	to carefully	put	each	rock	in	a	stable	place.	I	just	dropped	them	wherever.	It only	took	me	an	hour.
And	now	I’m	done!
I’ll	start	heading	home	tomorrow,	with	my	new	100kg	broken	radio.


Chapter	10
LOG ENTRY: SOL	90



Seven	days	since	Pathfinder,	and	seven	days	closer	to	home.
As	I’d	hoped,	my	inbound	tracks	gave	me	a	path	back	to	Lewis Valley.	Then	it	was	four	sols	of	easy	driving.	The	hills	to	my	left	made	it impossible	to	get	lost,	and	the	terrain	was	smooth.
But	all	good	things	come	to	an	end.	I’m	back	in	Acidalia	Planitia now.	My	outgoing	tracks	are	long	gone.	It’s	been	16	days	since	I	was	last here.	Even	timid	weather	would	clear	them	out	in	that	time.
On	my	way	out,	I	should	have	made	a	pile	of	rocks	every	time	I camped.	The	land	is	so	flat	they’d	be	visible	for	kilometers.
On	second	thought,	thinking	back	to	making	that	damn	ramp…	ugh.
So	once	again	I	am	the	desert	wanderer,	using	Phobos	to	navigate,	and hoping	I	don’t	stray	too	far.	All	I	need	to	do	is	get	within	40km	of	the Hab	and	I’ll	pick	up	the	beacon.
I’m	feeling	optimistic.	For	the	first	time,	I	think	I	might	get	off	this planet	alive.	With	that	in	mind,	I’m	taking	soil	and	rock	samples	every time	I	do	an	EVA.
At	first,	I	figured	it	was	my	duty.	If	I	survive,	geologists	will	love	me for	it.	But	then	it	started	to	get	fun.	Now,	as	I	drive,	I	look	forward	to	that simple	act	of	bagging	rocks.
It	just	feels	nice	to	be	an	astronaut	again.	That’s	all	it	is.	Not	a reluctant	farmer,	not	an	electrical	engineer,	not	a	long	haul	trucker.	An astronaut.	I’m	doing	what	astronauts	do.	I	missed	it.


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	92

I	got	2	seconds	of	signal	from	the	Hab	beacon	today,	then	lost	it.	But it’s	a	good	sign.	I’ve	been	traveling	vaguely	north-northwest	for	two days.	I	must	be	a	good	100km	from	the	Hab;	it’s	a	miracle	I	got	any signal	at	all.	Must	have	been	a	moment	of	perfect	weather	conditions.
During	the	boring-ass	days,	I’m	working	my	way	through	“The	Six Million	Dollar	Man”	from	Commander	Lewis’s	inexhaustible	collection of	‘70s	tripe.
I	just	watched	an	episode	where	Steve	Austin	fights	a	Russian	Venus probe	that	landed	on	Earth	by	mistake.	As	an	expert	in	interplanetary travel,	I	can	tell	you	there	are	no	scientific	inaccuracies	in	the	story.	It’s quite	common	for	probes	to	land	on	the	wrong	planet.	Also,	the	probe’s large,	flat-panel	hull	is	ideal	for	the	high-pressure	Venusian	atmosphere. And,	as	we	all	know,	probes	often	refuse	to	obey	directives,	choosing instead	to	attack	humans	on	sight.
So	far,	Pathfinder	hasn’t	tried	kill	me.	But	I’m	keeping	an	eye	on	it.
LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	93
I	found	the	Hab	signal	today.	I	have	a	solid	bearing	and	direction	to go.	No	more	chance	to	get	lost.	According	to	the	computer,	I’m	24718 meters	away.
I’ll	be	home	tomorrow.	Even	if	the	rover	has	a	catastrophic	failure, I’ll	be	fine.	I	can	walk	to	the	Hab	from	here.
I	don’t	know	if	I’ve	mentioned	this	before,	but	I	am	really	.... sick	of	being	in	this	rover.	I’ve	spent	so	much	time	seated	or	laying down,	my	back	is	all	screwed	up.	Of	all	my	crewmates,	the	one	I	miss most	right	now	is	Beck.	He’d	fix	my	aching	back.
Though	he’d	probably	give	me	a	bunch	of	shit	about	it.	“Why	didn’t you	do	stretching	exercises?	Your	body	is	important!	Eat	more	fiber,”	or whatever.
At	this	point	I’d	welcome	a	health	lecture.
During	training,	we	had	to	practice	the	dreaded	“Missed	Orbit” scenario.	In	the	event	of	a	second-stage	failure	during	MAV	ascent,	we’d be	in	orbit,	but	too	low	to	reach	Hermes.	We’d	be	skimming	the	upper atmosphere,	so	our	orbit	would	rapidly	decay.	NASA	would	remotely operate	Hermes	and	bring	it	in	for	rendezvous.	Then	we’d	get	the	hell	out of	there	before	Hermes	caught	too	much	drag.
To	drill	this,	they	made	us	stay	in	the	MAV	simulator	for	3	miserable days.	Six	people	in	an	ascent	vehicle	originally	designed	for	a	23	minute flight.	It	got	a	little	cramped.	And	by	“a	little	cramped”	I	mean	“We wanted	to	kill	each	other”.
Once	we	got	out,	Commander	Lewis	declared	“what	happened	in Missed	Orbit	stays	in	Missed	Orbit.”	It	may	seem	trite,	but	it	worked.	We put	it	behind	us	and	got	back	to	normal.
I’d	give	anything	for	just	five	minutes	of	Missed	Orbit	training.	I’m really	feeling	alone	lately.	Up	till	this	road	trip,	I’ve	been	too	busy	to mope.	But	the	long,	dull	days	with	nothing	to	do	really	drives	it	home.
I’m	further	away	from	other	humans	than	anyone	has	ever	been. Man,	I	hope	I	get	Pathfinder	working	again.


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	94

Home	sweet	home!
Today	I	write	from	my	gigantic,	cavernous	Hab!
The	first	thing	I	did	when	I	got	in	was	wave	my	arms	wildly	while running	in	circles.	Felt	great!	I	was	in	that	damn	rover	for	22	sols,	and couldn’t	even	walk	without	suiting	up.
I’ll	need	to	endure	twice	that	to	get	to	Ares	4,	but	that’s	a	problem	for later.
After	a	few	celebratory	laps	around	the	Hab,	it	was	time	to	get	to work.
First,	I	fired	up	the	Oxygenator	and	Atmospheric	Regulator.	Checking the	air	levels,	everything	looked	good.	There	was	still	CO2,	so	the	plants hadn’t	suffocated	without	me	exhaling	for	them.
Naturally	I	did	an	exhaustive	check	on	my	crops,	and	they’re	all healthy.
I	added	my	bags	of	shit	to	the	manure	pile.	Lovely	smell,	I	can	tell you.	But	once	I	mixed	some	soil	in,	it	died	down	to	tolerable	levels.	I dumped	my	box	o’	pee	into	the	Water	Reclaimer.
I’d	been	gone	over	three	weeks,	and	had	left	the	Hab	very	humid	for the	sake	of	the	crops.	That	much	water	in	the	air	can	cause	any	amount	of electrical	problems,	so	I	spent	the	next	few	hours	doing	full	systems checks	on	everything.
Then	I	kind	of	lounged	around	for	a	while.	I	wanted	to	spend	the	rest of	the	day	relaxing,	but	I	had	more	to	do.
Suiting	up,	I	went	out	to	the	rover	and	dragged	the	solar	cells	off	the roof.	Over	the	next	few	hours,	I	put	them	back	where	they	belonged, wiring	them	into	the	Hab’s	power	grid.
Getting	the	Lander	off	the	roof	was	a	hell	of	a	lot	easier	than	getting	it up	there.	I	detached	a	strut	from	the	MAV	platform	and	dragged	it	over	to the	rover.	Leaning	it	against	the	hull	and	digging	the	other	end	in	to	the ground	for	stability,	I	had	a	ramp.
I	should	have	brought	that	strut	with	me	to	the	Pathfinder	site.	Live and	learn.
There’s	no	way	to	get	the	Lander	in	the	airlock.	It’s	just	too	big.	I could	probably	dismantle	it	and	bring	it	in	a	piece	at	a	time,	but	there’s	a pretty	compelling	reason	not	to.
With	no	magnetic	field,	Mars	has	no	defense	against	harsh	solar radiation.	If		I	were	exposed	to	it,	I’d	get	so	much	cancer,	the	cancer would	have	cancer.	So	the	Hab	canvas	shields	from	electromagnetic waves.	This	means	the	Hab	itself	it	would	block	any	transmissions	if	the Lander	were	inside.
Speaking	of	cancer,	it	was	time	to	get	rid	of	the	RTG.
It	pained	me	to	climb	back	into	the	rover,	but	it	had	to	be	done.	If	the RTG	ever	broke	open,	it	would	kill	me	to	death.
NASA	decided	4km	was	the	safe	distance,	and	I	wasn’t	about	to second-guess	them.	Driving	back	to	where	Commander	Lewis	had originally	dumped	it,	I	ditched	it	in	the	same	hole	and	drove	back	to	the Hab.
I’ll	start	work	on	the	Lander	tomorrow.
Now,	to	enjoy	a	good,	long	sleep	in	an	actual	cot.	With	the	comforting knowledge	that	when	I	wake,	my	morning	piss	will	go	into	a	toilet.

LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	95
Today	was	all	about	repairs!
The	Pathfinder	mission	ended	because	the	Lander	had	an	unknown critical	failure.	Once	they	lost	contact	with	the	Lander,	they	had	no	idea what	became	of	Sojourner.	It	might	be	in	better	shape.	Maybe	it	just needs	power.	Power	it	couldn’t	get	with	the	solar	panels	hopelessly	caked with	dust.
Setting	it	on	my	workbench,	I	pried	open	a	panel	to	peek	inside.	The battery	was	a	lithium	thionyl	chloride	non-rechargeable.	I	figured	that	out from	some	subtle	clues:	the	shape	of	the	connection	points,	the	thickness of	the	insulation,	and	the	fact	that	it	had	“LiSOCl2	NON-RCHRG” written	on	it.
I	cleaned	the	solar	panels	thoroughly,	then	aimed	a	small,	flexible lamp	directly	at	them.	The	battery’s	long	dead.	But	the	panels	might	be ok,	and	Sojourner	can	operate	directly	off	them.	We’ll	see	if	anything happens.
Then	it	was	time	to	take	a	look	at	Sojourner’s	daddy.	I	suited	up	and headed	out.
On	most	landers,	the	weak	point	is	the	battery.	It’s	the	most	delicate component,	and	when	it	dies,	there’s	no	way	to	recover.
Landers	can’t	just	shut	down	and	wait	when	they	have	low	batteries. Their	electronics	won’t	work	unless	they’re	at	a	minimum	temperature. So	they	have	heaters	to	keep	the	electronics	warm.	It’s	a	problem	that rarely	comes	up	on	Earth,	but	hey.	Mars.
Over	time,	the	solar	panels	get	covered	with	dust.	Then	winter	brings colder	temperatures	and	less	daylight.	This	all	combines	into	a	big	“.... you”	from	Mars	to	your	lander.	Eventually	it’s	using	more	power	to	keep warm	than	it’s	getting	from	the	meager	daylight	that	makes	it	through	the dust.
Once	the	battery	runs	down,	the	electronics	get	too	cold	to	operate, and	the	whole	system	dies.	The	solar	panels	will	recharge	the	battery somewhat,	but	there’s	nothing	to	tell	the	system	to	reboot.	Anything	that could	make	that	decision	would	be	electronics,	which	would	not	be working.	Eventually,	the	now	unused	battery	will	lose	its	ability	to	retain charge.
That’s	the	usual	cause	of	death.	And	I	sure	hope	it’s	what	killed Pathfinder.
I	piled	some	leftover	parts	of	the	MDV	into	a	makeshift	table	and ramp.	Then	I	dragged	the	Lander	up	to	my	new	outdoor	workbench. Working	in	an	EVA	suit	is	annoying	enough.	Bending	over	the	whole time	would	have	been	torture.
I	got	my	toolkit	and	started	poking	around.	Opening	the	outer	panel wasn’t	too	hard	and	I	identified	the	battery	easily	enough.	JPL	labels everything.	It’s	a	40	Amp-hour	Ag-Zr	battery	with	an	optimal	voltage	of 1.5V.	Wow.	They	really	made	those	things	run	on	nothin’	back	then.
I	detached	the	battery	and	headed	back	inside.	I	checked	it	with	my electronics	kit,	and	sure	enough	it’s	dead,	dead,	dead.	I	could	shuffle across	a	carpet	and	hold	more	charge.
So	I	knew	what	it	needed.	1.5	volts.
Compared	to	the	makeshift	crap	I’ve	been	gluing	together	since	Sol	6, this	was	a	breeze.	I	have	voltage	controllers	in	my	kit!	It	only	took	me	15 minutes	to	put	a	controller	on	a	reserve	power	line,	then	another	hour	to go	outside	and	run	the	line	to	where	the	battery	used	to	be.
Then	there’s	the	issue	of	heat.	It’s	a	good	idea	to	keep	electronics above	-40C.	The	temperature	today	is	a	brisk	-63C.
The	battery	was	big	and	easy	to	identify,	but	I	had	no	clue	where	the heaters	were.	Even	if	I	knew,	it’d	be	too	risky	to	hook	them	directly	to power.	I	could	easily	fry	the	whole	system.
So	instead,	I	went	to	good	old	“Spare	Parts”	Rover	1,	and	stole	it’s environment	heater.	I’ve	gutted	that	poor	rover	so	much,	it	looks	like	I parked	it	in	a	bad	part	of	town.
Bringing	the	heater	to	my	“workbench,”	I	hooked	it	to	Hab	power.
Then	I	rested	it	in	the	Lander	where	the	battery	used	to	be. Now	I	wait.	And	hope.


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	96

I	was	really	hoping	I’d	wake	up	to	a	functional	Lander,	but	no	such luck.	Its	high-gain	antenna	is	right	where	I	last	saw	it.	Why	does	that matter?	Well,	I’ll	tell	ya…
If	the	Lander	comes	back	to	life	(and	that’s	a	big	if)	it’ll	try	to establish	contact	with	Earth.	Problem	is,	nobody’s	listening.	It’s	not	like the	Pathfinder	team	is	hanging	around	JPL	just	in	case	their	long	dead probe	is	repaired	by	a	wayward	astronaut.
The	Deep	Space	Network	and	SETI	are	my	best	bets	for	picking	up the	signal.	If	either	of	them	caught	a	blip	from	Pathfinder,	they’d	tell JPL.
JPL	would	quickly	figure	out	what	was	going	on,	especially	when they	triangulated	the	signal	to	my	landing	site.
They’d	tell	the	Lander	where	Earth	is,	and	it	would	angle	the	highgain	antenna	appropriately.	That	there,	the	angling	of	the	antenna,	is	how I’ll	know	if	it	linked	up.
So	far,	no	action.
There’s	still	hope.	Any	number	of	reasons	could	be	delaying	things. The	rover	heater	is	designed	to	heat	air	at	1	atmosphere.	The	thin	Martian air	severely	hampers	its	ability	to	work.	So	the	electronics	might	need more	time	to	warm	up.
Also,	Earth	is	only	visible	during	the	day.	I	(hopefully)	fixed	the Lander	yesterday	evening.	It’s	morning	now,	so	most	of	the	intervening time	has	been	night.	No	Earth.
Sojourner’s	also	showing	no	signs	of	life.	It’s	been	in	the	nice,	warm environment	of	the	Hab	all	night,	with	plenty	of	light	on	its	sparkling clean	solar	cells.	Maybe	it’s	running	an	extended	self-check,	or	staying still	until	it	hears	from	the	Lander	or	something.
I’ll	just	have	to	put	it	out	of	my	mind	for	now.


PATHFINDER	LOG:	SOL	0

BOOT	SEQUENCE	INITIATED
TIME	00:00:00
LOSS	OF	POWER	DETECTED,	TIME/DATE	UNRELIABLE LOADING	OS...

VXWARE	OPERATING	SYSTEM	(C)	WIND	RIVER	SYSTEMS PERFORMING	HARDWARE	CHECK:
INT.	TEMPERATURE:	-34C
EXT.	TEMPERATURE:	NONFUNCTIONAL
BATTERY:	FULL
HIGAIN:	OK
LOGAIN:	OK
WIND	SENSOR:	NONFUNCTIONAL
METEOROLOGY:	NONFUNCTIONAL
ASI:	NONFUNCTIONAL
IMAGER:	OK
ROVER	RAMP:	NONFUNCTIONAL
SOLAR	A:	NONFUNCTIONAL
SOLAR	B:	NONFUNCTIONAL
SOLAR	C:	NONFUNCTIONAL
HARDWARE	CHECK	COMPLETE

BROADCASTING	STATUS LISTENING	FOR	TELEMETRY	SIGNAL...
LISTENING	FOR	TELEMETRY	SIGNAL...
LISTENING	FOR	TELEMETRY	SIGNAL...
SIGNAL	ACQUIRED

Chapter	11

“Something’s	coming	in…	yes…	yes!	It’s	Pathfinder!”
The	room	burst	in	to	applause	and	cheers.	Venkat	slapped	an	unknown technician	heartily	on	the	back	while	Bruce	pumped	his	fist	in	the	air.
The	ad-hoc	control	center	was	an	accomplishment	in	itself.	JPL	had just	20	days	to	piece	together	antiquated	computers,	repair	broken components,	network	everything,	and	install	hastily	made	software	to interact	with	the	modern	Deep	Space	Network.	A	team	of	engineers	had worked	around	the	clock,	finishing	only	two	days	earlier.
The	room	itself	was	formerly	a	conference	room;	JPL	had	no	space ready	for	the	sudden	need.	Crammed	with	computers	and	equipment, little	space	was	left	over	for	the	many	spectators	squeezing	in.
One	Associated	Press	camera	team	was	permitted.	The	rest	of	the media	would	have	to	satisfy	themselves	with	the	live	AP	feed,	and	await a	press	conference.
Venkat	turned	to	Bruce.	“God	damn,	Bruce.	You	really	pulled	a	rabbit out	of	your	hat	this	time!	Good	work!”
	“I’m	just	the	director,”	Bruce	said	modestly.	“Thank	the	guys	who got	all	this	shit	working.”
“Oh	I	will!”	Venkat	beamed.	“But	first	I	have	to	talk	to	my	new	best friend!”
Turning	to	the	headsetted	man	at	the	communications	console,	Venkat asked	“What’s	you’re	name,	new	best	friend?” “Tim,”	he	said,	not	taking	his	eyes	off	the	screen.
“What	now?”	Venkat	asked.
“We	sent	the	return	telemetry	automatically.	It’ll	get	there	in	just over	11	minutes.	Once	it	does,	Pathfinder	will	start	high-gain transmissions.	So	it’ll	be	22	minutes	till	we	hear	from	it	again.”
“Venkat’s	got	a	doctorate	in	physics,	Tim,”	Bruce	said,	“You	don’t need	to	explain	transmission	time	to	him.”
Tim	shrugged.	“You	can	never	tell	with	managers.”
“What	was	in	the	transmission	we	got?”	Venkat	asked.
“Just	the	bare	bones.	A	hardware	self	check.	It’s	got	a	lot	of “nonfunctional”	systems,	cause	they	were	on	the	panels	Watney removed.”
“What	about	the	camera?”
“It	says	the	imager’s	working.	We’ll	have	it	take	a	panorama	as	soon as	we	can.”
LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	97
It	worked!
Holy	....	shit	it	worked!
I	just	checked	the	Lander.	The	high	gain	antenna	is	angled	directly	at Earth!	Pathfinder	has	no	way	of	knowing	where	it	is,	so	it	has	no	way	of knowing	where	Earth	is.	The	only	way	for	it	to	find	out	is	getting	a	signal.
They	know	I’m	alive!
Happy	dance,	happy	dance,	I’m	doin’	the	happy	dance!
All	right.	Enough	happy	dance.	Time	to	make	with	the communicatin’!
“We	received	the	high-gain	response	just	over	half	an	hour	ago,” Venkat	said	to	the	assembled	press.	“We	immediately	directed	Pathfinder to	take	a	panoramic	image.	Hopefully,	Watney	has	some	kind	of	message for	us.	Questions?”
The	sea	of	reporters	raised	their	hands.
“Cathy,	let’s	start	with	you,”	Venkat	said,	pointing	her	out.
“Thanks,”	she	said.	“Have	you	had	any	contact	with	the	Sojourner rover?”
“Unfortunately,	no,”	he	replied.	“The	Lander	hasn’t	been	able	to connect	to	Sojourner,	and	we	have	no	way	to	contact	it	directly.”
“What	might	be	wrong	with	Sojourner?”
“I	can’t	even	speculate,”	Venkat	said.	“After	spending	that	long	on Mars,	anything	could	be	wrong	with	it.”
“Best	guess?”
“Our	best	guess	is	he	took	it	in	to	the	Hab.	The	Lander’s	signal wouldn’t	be	able	to	reach	Sojourner	through	Hab	canvas.”	Pointing	to another	reporter,	he	said	“You,	there.”
“Marty	West,	NBC	News,”	Marty	said.	“How	will	you	communicate with	Watney	once	everything’s	up	and	running?”
“That’ll	be	up	to	Watney,”	said	Venkat.	“All	we	have	to	work	with	is the	camera.	He	can	write	notes	and	hold	them	up.	But	how	we	talk	back	is trickier.”
“How	so?”	Marty	asked.
“Because	all	we	have	is	the	camera	platform.	That’s	the	only	moving part.	There	are	plenty	of	ways	to	get	information	across	with	just	the platform’s	rotation,	but	no	way	to	tell	Watney	about	them.	He’ll	have	to
come	up	with	something	and	tell	us.	We’ll	follow	his	lead.”
Pointing	to	the	next	reporter,	he	said,	“Go	ahead.”
“Jill	Holbrook,	BBC.	With	a	32	minute	round	trip,	and	nothing	but	a single	rotating	platform	to	talk	with,	it’ll	be	a	dreadfully	slow conversation,	won’t	it?”
“Yes	it	will,”	Venkat	confirmed.	“It’s	early	morning	in	Acidalia Planitia	right	now,	and	just	past	3am	here	in	Pasadena.	We’ll	be	here	all night,	and	that’s	just	for	a	start.	No	more	questions	for	now,	the	panorama is	due	back	in	a	few	minutes.	We’ll	keep	you	posted.”
Quickly	leaving	the	press	room,	Venkat	hurried	down	the	hall	to	the makeshift	Pathfinder	control	center.	He	pressed	through	the	throng	to	the communications	console.
“Anything,	Tim?”
“Totally,”	he	replied.	“But	we’re	staring	at	this	black	screen	because it’s	way	more	interesting	than	pictures	from	Mars.” “You’re	a	smart-ass,	Tim,”	Venkat	said.
“Noted.”
Bruce	pushed	his	way	forward.	“Still	another	few	seconds	on	the clock,”	he	said.
The	time	passed	in	silence.
“Getting	something,”	Tim	said.	“Yup.	It’s	the	panoramic.”
A	general	loosening	of	tension	coruscated	through	the	room	as	the image	slowly	came	through,	one	vertical	stripe	at	a	time.
“Martian	surface…”	Venkat	said	as	the	lines	displayed.	“More surface…”
“Edge	of	the	Hab!”	Bruce	said,	pointing	to	the	screen.
“Hab,”	Venkat	smiled.	“More	Hab	now…	more	Hab…	is	that	a message?	That’s	a	message!”
The	vertical	stripes	revealed	a	handwritten	note,	suspended	at	the camera’s	height	by	a	thin	metal	rod.
“We	got	a	note	from	Mark!”	Venkat	announced	to	the	room.
Applause	filled	the	room,	then	quickly	died	down.	“What’s	it	say?” someone	asked.
Venkat	leaned	closer	to	the	screen.	“It	says	…‘I’ll	write	questions here	–	Are	you	receiving?’” “Ok…?”	said	Bruce.
“That’s	what	it	says,”	Venkat	shrugged.
“Another	note,”	said	Tim,	pointing	to	the	screen	as	the	slow	march	of data	revealed	itself.
Venkat	leaned	in	again.	“This	one	says	‘Point	here	for	yes’.” “All	right,	I	see	what	he’s	going	for,”	said	Bruce.
“There’s	the	third	note,”	said	Tim.
“‘Point	here	for	no,’”	Venkat	read.	“‘Will	check	often	for	answer’” Venkat	folded	his	arms.	“All	right.	We	have	communication	with Mark.	Tim,	point	the	camera	at	‘Yes’.	Then,	start	taking	pictures	at	10 minute	intervals	until	he	puts	another	question	up.”


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	97	(2)

“Yes!”	They	said	“Yes!”
I	haven’t	been	this	excited	about	a	“yes”	since	prom	night!
Ok,	calm	down.
I	have	limited	paper	to	work	with.	These	cards	were	intended	to	label batches	of	samples.	I	have	about	50	cards.	I	can	use	both	sides,	and	if	it comes	down	to	it,	I	can	re-use	them	by	scratching	out	the	old	question.
The	Sharpie	I’m	using	will	last	much	longer	than	the	cards,	so	ink isn’t	a	problem.	But	I	have	to	do	all	my	writing	in	the	Hab.	I	don’t	know what	kind	of	hallucinogenic	crap	that	ink	is	made	of,	but	I’m	pretty	sure it	would	boil	off	in	1/90th	of	an	atmosphere.
I’m	using	old	parts	of	the	antenna	array	to	hold	the	cards	up.	There’s a	certain	irony	in	that.
We’ll	need	to	talk	faster	than	yes/no	questions	every	half-hour.	The camera	can	rotate	360	degrees,	and	I	have	plenty	of	antenna	parts.	Time to	make	an	alphabet.	But	I	can’t	just	use	the	letters	A	through	Z.	With	my Question	Card,	that	would	be	27	cards	around	the	lander.	Each	one	would only	get	13	degrees	of	arc.	Even	if	JPL	points	the	camera	perfectly, there’s	a	good	chance	I	won’t	know	which	letter	they	meant.
So	I’ll	have	to	use	ASCII.	That’s	how	computers	manage	characters.
Each	character	has	a	numerical	code	between	0	and	255.	Values	between 0	and	255	can	be	expressed	as	2	hexadecimal	digits.	By	giving	me	pairs of	hex	digits,	they	can	send	any	character	they	like,	including	numbers, punctuation,	etc.
How	do	I	know	which	values	go	with	which	characters?	Because Johanssen’s	laptop	is	a	wealth	of	information.	I	knew	she’d	have	an ASCII	table	in	there	somewhere.	All	computer	geeks	do.
So	I’ll	make	cards	for	0	through	9,	and	A	through	F.	That	makes	16 cards	to	place	around	the	camera,	plus	the	Question	Card.	17	cards	means over	21	degrees	each.	Much	easier	to	deal	with.
Time	to	get	to	work!

Spell	with	ASCII.	Numbers	0-F	at	21	degree	increments.	Will	watch camera	starting	11:00	my	time.	When	message	done,	return	to	this position.	Wait	20	minutes	after	completion	to	take	picture	(So	I	can	write and	post	reply).	Repeat	process	at	top	of	every	hour.
S…T…A…T…U…S
No	physical	problems.	All	Hab	components	functional.	Eating	3/4 rations.	Successfully	growing	crops	in	Hab	with	cultivated	soil.	Note:
Situation	not	Ares	3	crew’s	fault.	Bad	luck.
H…O…W…A…L…I…V…E
Impaled	by	antenna	fragment.	Knocked	out	by	decompression.	Landed face	down,	blood	sealed	hole.	Woke	up	after	crew	left.	Bio-monitor computer	destroyed	by	puncture.	Crew	had	reason	to	think	me	dead.	Not their	fault.
C…R…O…P…S…?
Long	story.	Extreme	Botany.	Have	126	m2	farmland	growing	potatoes.
Will	extend	food	supply,	but	not	enough	to	last	until	Ares	4	landing.
Modified	rover	for	long	distance	travel,	plan	to	drive	to	Ares	4.
W…E…S…A…W…-…S…A…T…L…I…T…E
Government	watching	me	with	satellites?	Need	tinfoil	hat!	Also	need faster	way	to	communicate.	Speak&Spell	taking	all	damn	day.	Any	ideas?
B…R…I…N…G…S…J…R…N…R…O…U…T
Sojourner	rover	brought	out,	placed	1	meter	due	north	of	Lander.	If you	can	contact	it,	I	can	draw	hex	numbers	on	the	wheels	and	you	can send	me	six	bytes	at	a	time.
S…J…R…N…R…N…O…T…R…S…P…N…D
Damn.	Any	other	ideas?	Need	faster	communication.
W…O…R…K…I…N…G…O…N…I…T
Earth	is	about	to	set.	Resume	08:00	my	time	tomorrow	morning.	Tell family	I’m	fine.	Give	crew	my	best.	Tell	Commander	Lewis	disco	sucks.


“I	was	up	all	night,”	said	Venkat.	“Forgive	me	if	I’m	a	little	punchy.
Who	are	you	again?”
“Jack	Trevor,”	said	the	thin,	pale	man	before	Venkat.	“I	work	in software	engineering.”
“What	can	I	do	for	you?”
“We	have	an	idea	for	communication.”
“I’m	all	ears.”
“We’ve	been	looking	through	the	old	Pathfinder	software.	We	got duplicate	computers	up	and	running	for	testing.	Same	computers	they used	to	find	a	problem	that	almost	killed	the	original	mission.	Real interesting	story,	actually,	turns	out	there	was	a	priority	inversion	in Sojourner’s	thread	management	and-” “Focus,	Jack,”	interrupted	Venkat.
“Right.	Well,	the	thing	is,	Pathfinder	has	an	OS	update	process.	So	we can	change	the	software	to	anything	we	want.”
“Ok,	how	does	this	help	us?”
“Pathfinder	has	two	communication	systems.	One	to	talk	to	us,	the other	to	talk	to	Sojourner.	We	can	change	the	second	system	to	broadcast on	the	Ares-3	rover	frequency.	And	we	can	have	it	pretend	to	be	the beacon	signal	from	the	Hab.”
“You	can	get	Pathfinder	talking	to	Mark’s	rover?”
“It’s	the	only	option.	The	Hab’s	radio	is	dead.	Thing	is,	all	the	rover does	is	triangulate	the	signal	to	fix	its	location.	It	doesn’t	send	data	back to	the	Hab.	It	just	has	a	voice	channel	for	the	astronauts	to	talk	to	each other.”
“So,”	Venkat	said,	“You	can	get	Pathfinder	talking	to	the	rover,	but you	can’t	get	the	rover	talking	back.”
“Right.	What	we	want	is	for	our	text	to	show	up	on	the	rover	screen, and	whatever	Watney	types	to	be	sent	back	to	us.	That	requires	a	change to	the	rover’s	software.”
“And	we	can’t	do	that,”	Venkat	concluded.	“Because	we	can’t	talk	to the	rover.”
“Not	directly,”	Jack	said.	“But	we	can	send	data	to	Watney,	and	have him	enter	it	in	to	the	rover.”
“How	much	data	are	we	talking	about?”
“I	have	guys	working	on	the	rover	software	right	now.	The	patch	file will	be	20	Meg,	minimum.	We	can	send	one	byte	to	Watney	every	4 seconds	or	so	with	the	‘Speak&Spell.’	It’d	take	three	years	of	constant broadcasting	to	get	that	patch	across.	So	that’s	no	good.”
“But	you’re	talking	to	me,	so	you	have	a	solution,	right?”	Venkat probed.
“Of	course!”	Jack	beamed.	“Software	engineers	are	sneaky	bastards when	it	comes	to	data	management.”
“Enlighten	me,”	said	Venkat,	patiently.
“Here’s	the	clever	part,”	Jack	said,	conspiratorially.	“The	rover
currently	parses	the	signal	into	bytes,	then	identifies	the	specific sequence	the	Hab	sends.	That	way,	natural	radio	waves	won’t	throw	off the	homing.	If	the	bytes	aren’t	right,	the	rover	ignores	them.”
“Ok,	so	what?”
“It	means	there’s	a	spot	in	the	codebase	where	it’s	got	the	parsed bytes.	We	can	insert	a	tiny	bit	of	code,	just	20	instructions,	to	write	the parsed	bytes	to	a	log	file	before	checking	their	validity.” “This	sounds	promising…”	Venkat	said.
“It	is!”	Jack	said	excitedly.	“First,	we	update	Pathfinder	with	our replacement	OS.	Then,	we	tell	Watney	exactly	how	to	hack	the	rover software	to	add	those	20	instructions.	Then	we	broadcast	the	rover’s patch	to	Pathfinder,	which	re-broadcasts	it	to	the	rover.	The	rover	logs	the bytes	to	a	file.	Finally,	Watney	launches	the	file	as	an	executable	and	it patches	the	rover	software!”
Venkat	furrowed	his	brow,	taking	in	far	more	information	than	his sleep-deprived	mind	wanted	to	accept.
“Um,”	Jack	said.	“You’re	not	cheering	or	dancing.”
“So	we	just	need	to	send	Watney	those	20	instructions?”	Venkat asked.
“That,	and	how	to	edit	the	files.	And	where	to	insert	the	instructions in	the	files.”
“Just	like	that?” “Just	like	that!”
Venkat	was	silent	for	a	moment.	“Jack.	I’m	going	to	buy	your	whole team	autographed	Star	Trek	memorabilia.”
“I	prefer	Star	Wars.”
“Hello?”
“I	need	a	picture	of	Watney.”
“Hi,	Annie.	Nice	to	hear	from	you,	too.	How	are	things	back	in
Houston?”
“Cut	the	shit,	Venkat.	I	need	a	picture.” “It’s	not	that	simple,”	Venkat	explained.
“You’re	talking	to	him	with	a	....	camera.	How	hard	can	it	be?”
“We	spell	out	our	message,	wait	20	minutes	and	then	take	a	picture.
Watney’s	back	in	the	Hab	by	then.”
“So	tell	him	to	be	around	when	you	take	the	next	picture,”	Annie demanded.
“We	can	only	send	one	message	per	hour,	and	only	when	Acidalia Planitia	is	facing	Earth,”	Venkat	said.	“We’re	not	going	to	waste	a message	just	to	tell	him	to	pose	for	a	photo.	Besides,	he’ll	be	in	his	EVA suit.	You	won’t	even	be	able	to	see	his	face.”
“I	need	something,	Venkat,”	Annie	said.	“You’ve	been	in	contact	for 24	hours	and	the	media	is	going	ape	shit.	They	want	an	image	for	the
story.	It’ll	be	on	every	news	site	in	the	world.”
“You	have	the	pictures	of	his	notes.	Make	do	with	that.”
“Not	enough,”	Annie	said.	“The	press	is	crawling	down	my	throat	for this.	And	up	my	ass.	Both	directions,	Venkat!	They’re	gonna	meet	in	the middle!”
“It’ll	have	to	wait	a	few	days.	We’re	going	to	try	and	link	Pathfinder to	the	rover	computer-“
“A	few	days!?”	Annie	gasped.	“This	is	all	anyone	cares	about	right now.	In	the	world.	You	see	what	I’m	getting	at?	This	is	the	biggest	story since	Apollo	13.	Give	me	a	....	picture!”
Venkat	sighed.	“I’ll	try	to	get	it	tomorrow.” “Great!”	She	said.	“Looking	forward	to	it.”
LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	98
I	have	to	be	watching	the	camera	when	it	spells	shit	out.	It’s	half	a byte	at	a	time.	So	I	watch	a	pair	of	numbers,	then	look	them	up	on	an ASCII	cheat-sheet	I	made.	That’s	one	letter.
I	don’t	want	to	forget	any	letters,	so	I	scrape	them	in	to	the	dirt	with	a rod.	The	process	of	looking	up	a	letter	and	scraping	it	in	the	dirt	takes	a couple	of	seconds.	Sometimes	when	I	look	back	at	the	camera,	I’ve missed	a	number.	I	can	usually	guess	it	from	context,	but	other	times	I just	miss	out.
Today	I	got	up	hours	earlier	than	I	needed	to.	It	was	like	Christmas morning!	I	could	hardly	wait	for	08:00	to	roll	around.	I	had	breakfast,	did some	unnecessary	checks	on	Hab	equipment,	and	read	some	Poirot.
Finally	the	time	came!
“CNHAKRVR2TLK2PTHFDRPRP4LONGMSG”
Yeah.	Took	me	a	minute.	“Can	hack	rover	to	talk	to	Pathfinder.
Prepare	for	long	message.”
That	took	some	mental	gymnastics	to	work	out.	But	it	was	great news!	If	we	could	get	that	set	up,	we’d	only	be	limited	by	transmission time!	I	set	up	a	note	that	said	“Roger.”
Not	sure	what	they	meant	by	“long	message”	but	I	figured	I	better	be ready.	I	went	out	15	minutes	before	the	top	of	the	hour	and	smoothed	out a	big	area	of	dirt.	I	found	the	longest	antenna	rod	I	had,	so	I	could	reach in	to	the	smooth	area	without	having	to	step	on	it.
Then	I	stood	by.	Waiting.
At	exactly	the	top	of	the	hour,	the	message	came.
“LNCHhexiditONRVRCMP,OPENFILE-/usr/lib/habcomm.soSCROLLTILIDXON
LFTIS:2AAE5,OVRWRT141BYTSWTHDATAWE’LLSNDNXTMSG,STA
W4NXTPIC20MINFTERTHSDONE”
Jesus.	Ok…
They	want	me	to	launch	‘hexedit’	on	the	rover’s	computer,	then	open the	file	/usr/lib/habcomm.so,	scroll	until	the	index	reading	on	the	left	of the	screen	is	2AAE5,	then	replace	the	bytes	there	with	a	141	byte sequence	NASA	will	send	in	the	next	message.	Fair	enough.
Also,	for	some	reason,	they	want	me	to	hang	around	for	the	next	pic. Not	sure	why.	You	can’t	see	any	part	of	me	when	I’m	in	the	suit.	Even	the faceplate	would	reflect	too	much	light.	Still,	it’s	what	they	want.
I	went	back	in	and	copied	down	the	message	for	future	reference. Then	I	wrote	a	short	note	and	came	back	out.	Usually	I’d	pin	up	the	note and	go	back	in.	But	this	time	I	had	to	hang	around	for	a	photo	op.
I	gave	the	camera	a	thumb’s-up	to	go	along	with	my	note,	which	said
“Ayyyyyy!”
Blame	the	‘70’s	TV.


“I	ask	for	a	picture	and	I	get	The	Fonz?”	Annie	admonished.
“You	got	your	picture,	quit	bitching,”	Venkat	said,	cradling	the	phone on	his	shoulder.	He	paid	more	attention	to	the	schematics	in	front	of	him than	the	conversation.
“Ayyyyyy!”	Annie	mocked.	“Why	would	he	do	that?”
“Have	you	met	Mark	Watney?”
“Fine,	fine,”	Annie	said.	“But	I	want	a	pic	of	his	face	ASAP.”
“Can’t	do	that.”
“Why	not?”
“Because	if	he	takes	off	his	helmet,	he’ll	die.	Annie,	I	have	to	go,	one of	the	JPL	programmers	is	here	and	it’s	urgent.	Bye!” “But-“	Annie	said	as	he	hung	up.
Jack,	in	the	doorway,	said	“It’s	not	urgent.”
“Yeah,	I	know,”	Venkat	said.	“What	can	I	do	for	you?”
“We	were	thinking,”	Jack	began,	“This	rover	hack	might	get	kind	of detailed.	We	may	have	to	do	a	bunch	of	back-and-forth	communication with	Watney.”
“That’s	fine,”	Venkat	said.	“Take	your	time,	do	it	right.”
“We	could	get	things	done	faster	with	a	shorter	transmission	time,” Jack	said.
Venkat	gave	him	a	puzzled	look.	“Do	you	have	a	plan	for	moving
Earth	and	Mars	closer	together?”
“Earth	doesn’t	have	to	be	involved,”	Jack	said.	“Hermes	is	73	million km	from	Mars	right	now.	Only	4	light-minutes	away.	Beth	Johanssen	is	a great	programmer.	She	could	talk	Mark	through	it.” “Out	of	the	question,”	Venkat	said.
“She’s	the	mission	Sysop,”	Jack	pressed	on,	“This	is	her	exact	area	of expertise.”
“Can’t	do	it,	Jack.	The	crew	still	doesn’t	know.”
“What	is	with	you?	Why	won’t	you	just	tell	them?”
“Watney’s	not	my	only	responsibility,”	Venkat	said.	“I’ve	got	five other	astronauts	in	deep	space,	who	have	to	concentrate	on	their	return trip.	Nobody	thinks	about	it,	but	statistically	they’re	in	more	danger	than
Watney	right	now.	He’s	on	a	planet.	They’re	in	space.”
Jack	raised	his	arms.	“Fine,	we’ll	do	it	the	slow	way.”


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	98	(2)

Ever	transcribed	141	random	bytes,	one	half	of	a	byte	at	a	time?
It’s	boring.	And	it’s	tricky	when	you	don’t	have	a	pen.
Earlier,	I	had	just	written	letters	in	the	sand.	But	this	time,	I	needed	a way	to	get	the	numbers	on	to	something	portable.	My	first	plan	was:	Use a	laptop!
Each	crewman	had	their	own	laptop.	So	I	have	six	at	my	disposal. Rather,	I	“had”	six.	I	now	have	five.	I	thought	a	laptop	would	be	fine outside.	It’s	just	electronics,	right?	It’ll	keep	warm	enough	to	operate	in the	short	term,	and	it	doesn’t	need	air	for	anything.
It	died	instantly.	The	screen	went	black	before	I	was	out	of	the airlock.	Turns	out	the	“L”	in	“LCD”	stands	for	“Liquid.”	I	guess	it	either froze	or	boiled	off.	Maybe	I’ll	post	a	consumer	review.	“Brought	product to	surface	of	Mars.	It	stopped	working.	0/10.”
So	I	used	a	camera.	I’ve	got	lots	of	them,	specially	made	for	working on	Mars.	I	wrote	the	bytes	in	the	sand	as	they	came	in,	took	a	picture, then	transcribed	them	in	the	Hab.
It’s	night	now,	so	no	more	messages.	Tomorrow,	I’ll	enter	this	in	to the	rover	and	the	geeks	at	JPL	can	take	it	from	there.


“Come	on	up	here,	Jack,”	said	Venkat.	“You	get	to	be	the	most
Timward	today.”
“Thanks,”	said	Jack,	taking	Venkat’s	place	next	to	Tim.	“Heya,	Tim!” “Jack,”	said	Tim.
“How	long	will	the	patch	take?”	Venkat	asked.
“Should	be	pretty	much	instant,”	Jack	answered.	“Watney	entered	the hack	earlier	today,	and	we	confirmed	it	worked.	We	updated	Pathfinder’s OS	without	any	problems.	We	sent	the	rover	patch,	which	Pathfinder rebroadcast.	Once	Watney	executes	the	patch	and	reboots	the	rover,	we should	get	a	connection.”
“Jesus	what	a	complicated	process,”	Venkat	said.
“Try	updating	a	Linux	server	some	time,”	Jack	said.
After	a	moment	of	silence,	Tim	said	“You	know	he	was	telling	a	joke, right?	That	was	supposed	to	be	funny.”
“Oh,”	said	Venkat.	“I’m	a	physics	guy,	not	a	computer	guy.”
“He’s	not	funny	to	computer	guys	either.” “You’re	a	very	unpleasant	man,	Tim,”	Jack	said.
“System’s	online,”	said	Tim.
“What?”
“It’s	online.	FYI.”
“Holy	crap!”	Jack	said.
“It	worked!”	Venkat	announced	to	the	room.


[11:18]JPL:	Mark,	this	is	Venkat	Kapoor.	We’ve been	watching	you	since	Sol	49.	The	whole	world’s been	rooting	for	you.	Amazing	job,	getting
Pathfinder.	We’re	working	on	rescue	plans.	JPL	is adjusting	Ares	4’s	MDV	to	do	a	short	overland flight.	They’ll	pick	you	up,	then	take	you	with them	to	Schiaparelli.	We’re	putting	together	a supply	mission	to	keep	you	fed	till	Ares	4 arrives.
[11:29]WATNEY:	Glad	to	hear	it.	Really	looking forward	to	not	dying.	I	want	to	make	it	clear	it wasn’t	the	crew’s	fault.	Side	question:	What	did they	say	when	they	found	out	I	was	alive?	Also,
“Hi,	mom!”
[11:41]JPL:	Tell	us	about	your	“crops”.	We estimated	your	food	packs	would	last	until	Sol	400 at	3/4	ration	per	meal.	Will	your	crops	affect that	number?	As	to	your	question:	We	haven’t	told the	crew	you’re	alive	yet.	We	wanted	them	to concentrate	on	their	own	mission.
[11:52]WATNEY:	The	crops	are	potatoes,	grown from	the	ones	we	were	supposed	to	prepare	on Thanksgiving.	They’re	doing	great,	but	the available	farmland	isn’t	enough	for sustainability.	I’ll	run	out	food	around	Sol	900. Also:	Tell	the	crew	I’m	alive!	What	the	....	is wrong	with	you?
[12:04]JPL:	We’ll	get	botanists	in	to	ask detailed	questions	and	double-check	your	work.
Your	life	is	at	stake,	so	we	want	to	be	sure.	Sol
900	is	great	news.	It’ll	give	us	a	lot	more	time to	get	the	supply	mission	together.	Also,	please watch	your	language.	Everything	you	type	is	being broadcast	live	all	over	the	world.
[12:15]WATNEY:	Look!	A	pair	of	boobs!	->	(.Y.)
“Thank	you,	Mr.	President,”	Teddy	said	in	to	the	phone.	“I	appreciate the	call,	and	I’ll	pass	your	congratulations	on	to	the	whole	organization.” Hanging	up,	he	saw	Mitch	Henderson	in	the	doorway.
“This	a	good	time?”	Mitch	asked.
“Come	in,	Mitch,”	Teddy	said.	“Have	a	seat.”
“Thanks,”	Mitch	said,	sitting	in	a	fine	leather	couch.	“Good	day today!”
“Yes,	it	was,”	Teddy	agreed.	“Another	step	closer	to	getting	Watney back	alive.”
“Yeah,	about	that,”	said	Mitch.	“You	probably	know	why	I’m	here.”
“I	can	take	a	guess,”	said	Teddy.	“You	want	to	tell	the	crew	Watney’s alive.”
“Yes,”	Mitch	said.
“And	you’re	bringing	this	up	with	me	while	Venkat	is	in	Pasadena,	so he	can’t	argue	the	other	side.”
“I	shouldn’t	have	to	clear	this	with	you	or	Venkat	or	anyone	else.	I’m the	flight	director.	It	should	have	been	my	call	from	the	beginning,	but you	two	stepped	in	and	overrode	me.	Ignoring	all	that,	we	agreed	we’d tell	them	when	there	was	hope.	And	now	there’s	hope.	We’ve	got communication,	we	have	a	plan	for	rescue	in	the	works,	and	his	farm buys	us	enough	time	to	get	him	supplies.” “Ok,	tell	them.”	Teddy	said.
Mitch	paused.	“Just	like	that?”
“I	knew	you’d	be	here	sooner	or	later,	so	I	already	thought	it	through and	decided.	Go	ahead	and	tell	them.”
Mitch	stood	up.	“All	right.	Thanks,”	he	said	as	he	left	the	office.
Teddy	swiveled	in	his	chair	and	looked	out	his	windows	to	the	night sky.	He	pondered	the	faint,	red	dot	amongst	the	stars.	“Hang	in	there Watney,”	he	said	to	no	one.	“We’re	coming.”
	 
Chapter	12

Watney	slept	peacefully	in	his	bunk.	He	shifted	slightly	as	some pleasant	dream	put	a	smile	on	his	face.	The	previous	day	had	been particularly	labor-intensive,	so	he	slept	deeper	and	better	than	he	had	in	a long	time.
“Good	morning	crew!”	Lewis	called	out.	“It’s	a	brand	new	day!	Up and	at	‘em!”
Watney	added	his	voice	to	a	chorus	of	groans.
“Come	on,”	Lewis	prodded,	“no	bitching.	You	got	40	minutes	more sleep	than	you	would’ve	on	Earth.”
Martinez	was	first	out	of	his	bunk.	An	Air-Force	man,	he	could	match Lewis’s	Navy	schedule	with	ease.	“Morning,	Commander,”	he	said crisply.
Johanssen	sat	up,	but	made	no	further	move	toward	the	harsh	world outside	her	blankets.	A	career	software-engineer,	mornings	were	never her	forte.
Vogel	slowly	lumbered	from	his	bunk,	checking	his	watch.	He wordlessly	pulled	on	his	jumpsuit,	smoothing	out	what	wrinkles	he	could.
He	sighed	inwardly	at	the	grimy	feeling	of	another	day	without	a	shower.
Watney	turned	away	from	the	noise,	hugging	a	pillow	to	his	head.
“Noisy	people	go	away,”	he	mumbled.
“Beck!”	Martinez	called	out,	shaking	the	mission’s	doctor.	“Rise	and shine,	bud!”
“Yeah,	ok,”	Beck	said	blearily.
Johanssen	fell	out	of	her	bunk,	then	remained	on	the	floor.
Pulling	the	pillow	from	Watney’s	hands,	Lewis	said	“Let’s	move,
Watney!	Uncle	Sam	paid	$100,000	for	every	second	we’ll	be	here.”
“Bad	woman	take	pillow,”	Watney	groaned,	unwilling	to	open	his eyes.
“Back	on	Earth,	I’ve	tipped	200-pound	men	out	of	their	bunks.	Want to	see	what	I	can	do	in	0.4g?”
“No,	not	really,”	Watney	said,	sitting	up.
Having	rousted	the	troops,	Lewis	sat	at	the	comm	station	to	check overnight	messages	from	Houston.
Watney	shuffled	to	the	ration	cupboard	and	grabbed	a	breakfast	at random.
“Hand	me	an	‘eggs’,	will	ya,”	Martinez	said.
“You	can	tell	the	difference?”	Watney	said,	passing	Martinez	a	pack.
“Not	really,”	Martinez	said.
“Beck,	what’ll	you	have?”	Watney	continued. “Don’t	care,”	Beck	said.	“Give	me	whatever.” Watney	tossed	a	pack	to	him.
“Vogel,	your	usual	sausages?” “Ja,	please,”	Vogel	responded.
“You	know	you’re	a	stereotype,	right?”
“I	am	comfortable	with	that,”	Vogel	replied,	taking	the	proffered breakfast.
“Hey	Sunshine,”	Watney	called	to	Johanssen.	“Eating	breakfast today?”
“Mnrrn,”	Johanssen	grunted.
“Pretty	sure	that’s	a	no,”	Watney	guessed.
The	crew	ate	in	silence.	Johanssen	eventually	trudged	to	the	ration cupboard	and	got	a	coffee	packet.	Clumsily	adding	hot	water,	she	sipped it	until	wakefulness	crept	in.
“Mission	updates	from	Houston,”	Lewis	said.	“Satellites	show	a storm	coming,	but	we	can	do	surface	ops	before	it	gets	here.	Vogel, Martinez,	you’ll	be	with	me	outside.	Johanssen,	you’re	stuck	tracking weather	reports.	Watney,	your	soil	experiments	are	bumped	up	to	today.
Beck,	run	the	samples	from	yesterday’s	EVA	through	the	spectrometer.” “Should	you	really	go	out	with	a	storm	on	the	way?”	Beck	asked.
“Houston	authorized	it,”	Lewis	said.
“Seems	needlessly	dangerous.”
“Coming	to	Mars	was	needlessly	dangerous,”	Lewis	said.	“What’s your	point?”
Beck	shrugged.	“Just	be	careful.”

Three	figures	looked	eastward.	Their	bulky	EVA	suits	rendered	them nearly	identical.	Only	the	European	Union	flag	on	Vogel’s	shoulder distinguished	him	from	Lewis	and	Martinez,	who	donned	the	Stars	and Stripes.
The	darkness	to	the	east	undulated	and	flickered	in	the	rays	of	the rising	sun.
“The	storm.”	Vogel	said	in	his	accented	English.	“It	is	closer	than
Houston	reported.”
“We’ve	got	time,”	Lewis	said.	“Focus	on	the	task	at	hand.	This	EVA’s all	about	chemical	analysis.	Vogel,	you’re	the	chemist,	so	you’re	in charge	of	what	we	dig	up.”
“Ja,”	Vogel	said.	“Please	dig	30	centimeters	and	get	soil	samples.	At least	100	grams	each.	Very	important	is	30	centimeters	down.”
	“Will	do.”	Lewis	said.	“Stay	within	100	meters	of	the	Hab,”	she added.
	“Mm,”	Vogel	said.
“Yes,	Ma’am,”	said	Martinez.
They	split	up.	Greatly	improved	since	the	days	of	Apollo,	Ares	EVA suits	allowed	much	more	freedom	of	motion.	Digging,	bending	over,	and bagging	samples	were	trivial	tasks.
After	a	time,	Lewis	asked	“How	many	samples	do	you	need?”
“Seven	each,	perhaps?”
“That’s	fine,”	Lewis	confirmed.	“I’ve	got	four	so	far.”
“Five	here,”	Martinez	said.	“Of	course,	we	can’t	expect	the	Navy	to keep	up	with	the	Air	Force,	now	can	we?”
“So	that’s	how	you	want	to	play	it?”	Lewis	said.
“Just	call	‘em	as	I	see	‘em	Commander.”
“Johanssen	here,”	came	the	sysop’s	voice	over	the	radio.	“Houston’s upgraded	the	storm	to	‘severe’.	It’s	going	to	be	here	in	15	minutes.” “Back	to	base,”	Lewis	said.

The	Hab	shook	in	the	roaring	wind	as	the	astronauts	huddled	in	the center.	All	six	of	donned	their	EVA	suits	in	case	of	a	breach.	Johanssen watched	her	laptop	while	the	rest	watched	her.
“Sustained	winds	over	100kph	now,”	she	said.	“Gusting	to	125.”
“Jesus,	we’re	gonna	end	up	in	Oz,”	Watney	said.	“What’s	the	abort windspeed?”
“Technically	150kph,”	Martinez	said.	“Any	more	than	that	and	the
MAV’s	in	danger	of	tipping.”
“Any	predictions	on	the	storm	track?”	Lewis	asked.
“This	is	the	edge	of	it,”	Johanssen	said,	staring	at	her	screen.	“It’s gonna	get	worse	before	it	gets	better.”
The	Hab	canvas	rippled	under	the	brutal	assault	as	the	internal supports	bent	and	shivered	with	each	gust.	The	cacophony	grew	louder	by the	minute.
“All	right,”	Lewis	said.	“Prep	for	abort.	We’ll	go	to	the	MAV	and hope	for	the	best.	If	the	wind	gets	too	high,	we’ll	launch.”
Leaving	the	Hab	in	pairs,	they	grouped	up	outside	airlock	1.	The driving	wind	and	sand	battered	them,	but	they	were	able	to	stay	on	their feet.
“Visibility	is	almost	zero,”	Lewis	said.	“If	you	get	lost,	home	in	on my	suit’s	telemetry.	The	wind’s	gonna	be	rougher	away	from	the	Hab,	so be	ready.”
Pressing	through	the	gale,	they	stumbled	toward	the	MAV.
“Hey,”	Watney	panted,	“Maybe	we	could	shore	up	the	MAV.	Make tipping	less	likely.”
“How?”	Lewis	huffed.
“We	could	use	cables	from	the	solar	farm	as	guy	lines.”	He	wheezed for	a	few	moments,	then	continued.	“The	rovers	could	be	anchors.	The trick	would	be	getting	the	line	around	the-“
Flying	wreckage	slammed	Watney,	carrying	him	off	in	to	the	wind.
“Watney!”	Johanssen	exclaimed.
“What	happened?”	Lewis	said.
“Something	hit	him!”	Johanssen	reported.
“Watney,	report,”	Lewis	said.
No	reply.
“Watney,	report,”	Lewis	repeated.
Again,	she	was	met	with	silence.
“He’s	offline,”	Johanssen	reported.	“I	don’t	know	where	he	is!”
“Commander,”	Beck	said,	“Before	we	lost	telemetry,	his decompression	alarm	went	off!”
“Shit!”	Lewis	exclaimed.	“Johanssen	where	did	you	last	see	him?”
“He	was	right	in	front	of	me	and	then	he	was	gone,”	she	said.	“He flew	off	due	west.”
“Ok,”	Lewis	said.	“Martinez,	get	to	the	MAV	and	prep	for	launch.
Everyone	else,	home	in	on	Johanssen.”
“Doctor	Beck,”	Vogel	said	as	he	stumbled	through	the	storm,	“How long	can	a	person	survive	decompression?”
“Less	than	a	minute,”	Beck	said,	emotion	choking	his	voice.
“I	can’t	see	anything,”	Johanssen	said	as	the	crew	crowded	around her.
“Line	up	and	walk	west,”	Lewis	commanded.	“Small	steps.	He’s probably	prone;	we	don’t	want	to	step	over	him.”
Staying	in	sight	of	one	another,	they	trudged	through	the	chaos.
Martinez	fell	in	to	the	MAV	airlock	and	forced	it	closed	against	the wind.	Once	it	pressurized	he	quickly	doffed	his	suit.	Climbing	the	ladder to	the	crew	compartment,	he	slid	in	to	the	pilot’s	couch	and	booted	the system.
Grabbing	the	emergency-launch	checklist	with	one	hand,	he	flicked switches	rapidly	with	the	other.	One	by	one,	the	systems	reported	flightready	status.	As	they	came	online,	he	noted	one	in	particular.
“Commander,”	he	radioed,	“The	MAV’s	got	a	7	degree	tilt.	It’ll	tip	at
12.3.”
“Copy	that,”	Lewis	said.
“Johanssen,”	Beck	said,	looking	at	his	arm	computer,	“Watney’s	biomonitor	sent	something	before	going	offline.	My	computer	just	says	‘Bad Packet.’”
“I	have	it,	too,”	Johanssen	said.	“It	didn’t	finish	transmitting.	Some data’s	missing	and	there’s	no	checksum.	Gimme	a	sec.”
“Commander,”	Martinez	said.	“Message	from	Houston.	We’re officially	scrubbed.	The	storm’s	definitely	gonna	be	too	rough.” “Copy,”	Lewis	said.
“They	sent	that	four	and	a	half	minutes	ago,”	Martinez	continued,
“while	looking	at	satellite	data	from	nine	minutes	ago.” “Understood,”	Lewis	said.	“Continue	prepping	for	launch.” “Copy,”	Martinez	said.
“Beck,”	Johanssen	said.	“I	have	the	raw	packet.	It’s	plaintext:	BP	0,
PR	0,	TP	36.2.	That’s	as	far	as	it	got.”
“Copy,”	Beck	said	morosely.	“Blood	pressure	0,	pulse	rate	0, temperature	normal.”
The	channel	fell	silent	for	some	time.	They	continued	pressing forward,	shuffling	through	the	sandstorm,	hoping	for	a	miracle.
“Temperature	normal?”	Lewis	said,	a	hint	of	hope	in	her	voice.
“It	takes	a	while	for	the-“	Beck	stammered.	“It	takes	a	while	to	cool.”
“Commander,”	Martinez	said.	“Tilting	at	10.5	degrees	now,	with gusts	pushing	it	to	11.”
“Copy,”	Lewis	said.	“Are	you	at	pilot-release?”
“Affirmative,”	Martinez	replied.	“I	can	launch	any	time.”
“If	it	tips,	can	you	launch	before	it	falls	completely	over?”
“Uh,”	Martinez	said,	not	expecting	the	question.	“Yes	Ma’am.	I’d take	manual	control	and	go	full	throttle.	Then	I’d	nose	up	and	return	to pre-programmed	ascent.”
“Copy	that,”	Lewis	said.	“Everyone	home	in	on	Martinez’s	suit.
That’ll	get	you	to	the	MAV	airlock.	Get	in	and	prep	for	launch.” “What	about	you,	Commander?”	Beck	asked.
“I’m	searching	a	little	more.	Get	moving.	And	Martinez,	if	you	start to	tip,	launch.”
“You	really	think	I’ll	leave	you	behind?”	Martinez	said.
“I	just	ordered	you	to,”	Lewis	replied.	“You	three,	get	to	the	ship.”
They	reluctantly	obeyed	Lewis’s	order,	and	made	their	way	toward the	MAV.	The	punishing	wind	fought	them	every	step	of	the	way.
Unable	to	see	the	ground,	Lewis	shuffled	forward.	Remembering something,	she	reached	to	her	back	and	got	a	pair	of	rock-drill	bits.	She had	added	the	1-meter	bits	to	her	equipment	that	morning,	anticipating geological	sampling	later	in	the	day.	Holding	one	in	each	hand,	she dragged	them	along	the	ground	as	she	walked.
After	20	meters,	she	turned	around	and	walked	the	opposite	direction. Walking	a	straight	line	proved	to	be	impossible.	Not	only	did	she	lack visual	references,	the	endless	wind	pushed	her	off	course.	The	sheer volume	of	attacking	sand	buried	her	feet	with	each	step.	Grunting,	she pressed	on.
Beck,	Johanssen,	and	Vogel	squeezed	in	to	the	MAV	airlock. Designed	for	two,	it	could	be	used	by	three	in	emergencies.	As	it equalized,	Lewis’s	voice	came	over	the	radio.
“Johanssen,”	she	said.	“Would	the	rover	IR	camera	do	any	good?”
“Negative,”	Johanssen	replied.	“IR	can’t	get	through	sand	any	better than	visible	light.”
“What’s	she	thinking?”	Beck	asked	after	removing	his	helmet.	“She’s a	geologist.	She	knows	IR	can’t	get	through	a	sandstorm.”
“She	is	grasping,”	Vogel	said,	opening	the	inner	door.	“We	must	get to	the	couches.	Please	hurry.”
“I	don’t	feel	good	about	this,”	Beck	said.
“Neither	do	I,	Doctor,”	said	Vogel,	climbing	the	ladder.	“But	the
Commander	has	given	us	orders.	Insubordination	will	not	help.”
“Commander,”	Martinez	radioed,	“We’re	tilting	11.6	degrees.	One good	gust	and	we’re	tipping.”
“What	about	the	proximity	radar?”	Lewis	said,	“Could	it	detect
Watney’s	suit?”
“No	way,”	Martinez	said.	“It’s	made	to	see	Hermes	in	orbit,	not	the metal	in	a	single	space	suit.”
“Give	it	a	try,”	Lewis	said.
“Commander,”	said	Beck,	putting	on	a	headset	as	he	slid	in	to	his acceleration	couch.	“I	know	you	don’t	want	to	hear	this,	but	Watn-…
Mark’s	dead.”
“Copy,”	Lewis	said.	“Martinez,	try	the	radar.” “Roger,”	Martinez	radioed.
Bringing	the	radar	online,	he	waited	for	it	to	complete	a	self	check.
Glaring	at	Beck,	he	said	“What’s	the	matter	with	you?”
“My	friend	just	died,”	Beck	answered.	“And	I	don’t	want	my Commander	to	die	too.”
Martinez	gave	him	a	stern	look.	Turning	his	attention	back	to	the radar,	he	radioed	“Negative	contact	on	proximity	radar.” “Nothing?”	Lewis	asked.
“It	can	barely	see	the	Hab,”	he	replied.	“The	sandstorm’s	....
things	up.	Even	if	it	wasn’t,	there’s	not	enough	metal	in-	Shit!” “Strap	in!”	he	yelled	to	the	crew.	“We’re	tipping!”
The	MAV	began	to	creaking	as	it	tilted	faster	and	faster.
“13	degrees,”	Johanssen	called	out	from	her	couch.
Buckling	his	restraints,	Vogel	said	“We	are	far	past	balance.	We	will not	rock	back.”
“We	can’t	leave	her!”	Beck	yelled.	“Let	it	tip,	we’ll	fix	it!”
“32	metric	tons	including	fuel,”	Martinez	said,	his	hands	flying	over the	controls.	“If	it	hits	the	ground,	it’ll	do	structural	damage	to	the	tanks, frame,	and	probably	the	second	stage	engine.	We’d	never	be	able	to	fix it.”
“You	can’t	abandon	her!”	Beck	said.	“You	can’t.”
“I’ve	got	one	trick.	If	that	doesn’t	work,	I’m	following	her	orders.”
Bringing	the	Orbital	Maneuvering	System	online,	he	fired	a	sustained burn	from	the	nosecone	array.	The	small	thrusters	fought	against	the lumbering	mass	of	the	slowly	tilting	spacecraft.
“You	are	firing	the	OMS?”	Vogel	asked.
“I	don’t	know	if	it’ll	work.	We’re	not	tipping	very	fast,”	Martinez said.	“I	think	it’s	slowing	down…”
“The	aerodynamic	caps	will	have	automatically	ejected.”	Vogel	said.
“It	will	be	a	bumpy	ascent	with	three	holes	in	the	side	of	the	ship.”
	“Thanks	for	the	tip,”	Martinez	said,	maintaining	the	burn	and watching	the	tilt	readout.	“C’mon…”
“Still	13	degrees,”	Johanssen	reported.
“What’s	going	on	up	there?”	Lewis	radioed.	“You	went	quiet.
Respond.”
“Standby,”	Martinez	replied.
“12.9	degrees,”	Johanssen	said.
“It	is	working,”	Vogel	said.
“For	now,”	Martinez	said.	“I	don’t	know	if	maneuvering	fuel	will
last.”
“12.8	now.”	Johanssen	supplied.
“OMS	fuel	at	60	percent,”	Beck	said.	“How	much	do	you	need	to	dock with	Hermes?”
“10	percent	if	I	don’t	....	anything	up,”	Martinez	said,	adjusting	the thrust	angle.
“12.6,”	Johanssen	said.	“We’re	tipping	back.”
“Or	the	wind	died	down	a	little,”	Beck	postulated.	“Fuel	at	45 percent.”
“There	is	danger	of	damage	to	the	vents,”	Vogel	cautioned.	“The
OMS	was	not	made	for	prolonged	thrusts,”
“I	know,”	Martinez	said.	“I	can	dock	without	nose	vents	if	I	have	to.” “Almost	there…”	Johanssen	said.	“Ok	we’re	under	12.3.” “OMS	cutoff,”	Martinez	announced,	terminating	the	burn.
“Still	tipping	back,”	Johanssen	said.	“11.6…	11.5…	holding	at	11.5” “OMS	Fuel	at	22	percent,”	Beck	said.
“Yeah,	I	see	that,”	Martinez	replied.	“It’ll	be	enough.”
“Commander,”	Beck	radioed.	“You	need	to	get	to	the	ship	now.” “Agreed,”	Martinez	radioed.	“He’s	gone,	Ma’am.	Watney’s	gone.” The	four	crewmates	awaited	their	commander’s	response.
“Copy,”	she	finally	replied.	“On	my	way.”
They	lay	in	silence,	strapped	to	their	couches	and	ready	for	launch.
Beck	looked	at	Watney’s	empty	couch	and	saw	Vogel	doing	the	same. Martinez	ran	a	self-check	on	the	nosecone	OMS	thrusters.	They	were	no longer	safe	for	use.	He	noted	the	malfunction	in	his	log.
The	airlock	cycled.	After	removing	her	suit,	Lewis	made	her	way	to the	flight	cabin.	She	wordlessly	strapped	in	to	her	couch,	her	face	a frozen	mask.	Only	Martinez	dared	speak.
“Still	at	pilot	release,”	he	said	quietly.	“Ready	for	launch.” Lewis	closed	her	eyes	and	nodded.
“I’m	sorry,	Commander,”	Martinez	said.	“You	need	to	verbally-” “Launch,”	she	said.
“Yes,	Ma’am,”	he	replied,	activating	the	sequence.
The	retaining	clamps	ejected	from	the	launch	gantry,	falling	to	the ground.	Seconds	later,	preignition	pyros	fired,	igniting	the	main	engines, and	the	MAV	lurched	upward.
The	ship	slowly	gained	speed.	As	it	did,	wind-sheer	blew	it	laterally off	course.	Sensing	the	problem,	the	ascent	software	angled	the	ship	in	to the	wind	to	counteract	it.
As	fuel	was	consumed,	the	ship	got	lighter,	and	the	acceleration	more pronounced.	Rising	at	this	exponential	rate,	the	craft	quickly	reached maximum	acceleration.	A	limit	defined	not	by	the	ship’s	power,	but	by the	delicate	human	bodies	inside.
As	the	ship	soared,	the	open	OMS	ports	took	their	toll.	The	crew rocked	in	their	couches	as	the	craft	shook	violently.	Martinez	and	the ascent	software	kept	it	trim,	though	it	was	a	constant	battle.	The turbulence	tapered	off	and	eventually	fell	to	nothing	as	the	atmosphere became	thinner	and	thinner.
Suddenly,	all	force	stopped.	The	first	stage	had	completed.	The	crew experienced	weightlessness	for	several	seconds,	then	were	pressed	back in	to	their	couches	as	the	next	stage	began.	Outside,	the	now-empty	first stage	fell	away,	eventually	to	crash	on	some	unknown	area	of	the	planet below.
The	second	stage	pushed	the	ship	ever	higher,	and	in	to	low	orbit. Lasting	less	time	than	the	massive	first	stage,	and	running	much smoother,	it	seemed	almost	like	an	afterthought.
Abruptly,	the	engine	stopped,	and	an	oppressive	calm	replaced	the previous	cacophony.
“Main	engine	shutdown,”	Martinez	said.	“Ascent	time:	8	minutes,	14 seconds.	On	course	for	Hermes	intercept.”
Normally,	an	incident-free	launch	would	be	cause	for	celebration. This	one	earned	only	silence	broken	by	Johanssen’s	gentle	sobbing.

Four	months	later…

NASA	was	loathe	to	waste	research	time.	Trips	to	and	from	Mars were	as	busy	as	surface	operations.	The	crew	had	almost	caught	up	with the	backlog	of	work.	The	schedule	had	been	made	for	six,	not	five.
Beck	tried	not	to	think	about	the	painful	reason	he	was	doing	zero-g plant	growth	experiments.	He	noted	the	size	and	shape	of	the	fern	leaves, took	photos,	and	made	notes.
Having	completed	his	science	schedule	for	the	day,	he	checked	his watch.	Perfect	timing.	The	data	dump	would	be	completing	soon.	He floated	past	the	reactor	to	the	Semicone-A	ladder.
Traveling	feet-first	along	the	ladder,	he	soon	had	to	grip	it	in	earnest as	the	centripetal	force	of	the	rotating	ship	took	hold.	By	the	time	he reached	Semicone-A	he	was	at	0.4g.
No	mere	luxury,	the	artificial	gravity	kept	them	fit.	Without	it,	they would	have	spent	their	first	week	on	Mars	barely	able	to	walk.	Exercise regimens	could	keep	the	heart	and	bones	healthy,	but	none	had	been devised	that	would	give	them	full	function	from	Sol	1.
Because	the	ship	was	already	designed	for	it,	they	used	the	system	on the	return	trip	as	well.
Johanssen	sat	at	her	station.	Lewis	sat	in	the	adjacent	seat	while Vogel	and	Martinez	hovered	nearby.	The	data	dump	carried	emails	and videos	from	home.	It	was	the	high	point	of	the	day.
“Is	it	here	yet?”	Back	asked	as	he	entered	the	bridge.
“Almost,”	Johanssen	said.	“98%.”
“You’re	looking	cheerful,	Martinez,”	Beck	said.
“My	son	turned	three	yesterday,”	He	beamed.	“Should	be	some	pics of	the	party.	How	about	you?”
“Nothing	special,”	Beck	said.	“Peer-reviews	of	a	paper	I	wrote	a	few years	back.”
“Complete,”	Johanssen	said.	“All	the	personal	emails	are	dispatched to	your	laptops.	Also	there’s	a	telemetry	update	for	Vogel	and	a	system update	for	me.	Huh…	there’s	a	voice	message	addressed	to	the	whole crew.”
She	looked	over	her	shoulder	to	Lewis.
Lewis	shrugged.	“Play	it.”
Johanssen	opened	the	message,	then	sat	back.
“Hermes,	this	is	Mitch	Henderson,”	the	message	began.
“Henderson?”	Martinez	said,	puzzled.	“Talking	directly	to	us	without CAPCOM?”
Lewis	held	her	hand	up	to	signal	for	silence.
“I	have	some	news,”	Mitch’s	voice	continued,	“There’s	no	subtle	way to	put	this:	Mark	Watney’s	still	alive.” Johanssen	gasped.
“Wha-“	Beck	stammered.
Vogel	stood	agape	as	a	shocked	expression	swept	across	his	face.
Martinez	looked	to	Lewis.	She	leaned	forward	and	pinched	her	chin.
“I	know	that’s	a	surprise,”	Mitch	continued.	“And	I	know	you’ll	have a	lot	of	questions.	We’re	going	to	answer	those	questions.	But	for	now I’ll	just	give	you	the	basics.
“He’s	alive	and	healthy.	We	found	out	two	months	ago	and	decided not	to	tell	you;	we	even	censored	personal	messages.	I	was	strongly against	all	that.	We’re	telling	you	now	because	we	finally	have communication	with	him	and	a	viable	rescue	plan.	It	boils	down	to	Ares	4 picking	him	up	with	a	modified	MDV.
“We’ll	get	you	a	full	write-up	of	what	happened,	but	it’s	definitely not	your	fault.	Mark	stresses	that	every	time	it	comes	up.	It	was	just	bad luck.
“Take	some	time	to	absorb	this.	Your	science	schedules	are	cleared for	tomorrow.	Send	all	the	questions	you	want	and	we’ll	answer	them.
Henderson	out.”
The	message’s	end	brought	stunned	silence	to	the	bridge.
“He…He’s	alive?”	Martinez	said,	then	smiled.
Vogel	nodded	excitedly.	“He	lives.”
Johanssen	stared	at	her	screen	in	wide-eyed	disbelief.
“Holy	shit,”	Beck	laughed.	“Holy	shit!	Commander!	He’s	alive!” “I	left	him	behind,”	Lewis	said	quietly.
The	celebrations	ceased	immediately	as	the	crew	saw	their commander’s	inconsolable	expression.
“But,”	Beck	began,	“We	all	left	togeth-“
“You	followed	orders,”	Lewis	interrupted.	“I	left	him	behind.	In	a barren,	unreachable,	godforsaken	wasteland.”
Beck	looked	to	Martinez	pleadingly.	Martinez	opened	his	mouth,	but could	find	no	words	to	say.
Lewis	trudged	off	the	bridge. 
Chapter	13

The	employees	of	Deyo	Plastics	worked	double	shifts.	There	was	talk of	triple	shifts	if	NASA	increased	the	order	again.	No	one	minded.	The overtime	pay	was	spectacular	and	the	funding	was	limitless.
Woven	carbon	thread	ran	slowly	through	the	press,	which	sandwiched it	between	polymer	sheets.	The	completed	material	was	folded	four	times and	glued	together.	The	resulting	thick	sheet	was	then	coated	with	soft resin,	and	taken	to	the	hot-room	to	set.


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	114

Now	that	NASA	can	talk	to	me,	they	won’t	shut	the	hell	up.
They	want	constant	updates	on	every	Hab	system,	and	they’ve	got	a room	full	of	people	trying	to	micromanage	my	crops.	It’s	awesome	to have	a	bunch	of	dipshits	on	Earth	telling	me,	a	botanist,	how	to	grow plants.
I	mostly	ignore	them.	I	don’t	want	to	come	off	as	arrogant	here,	but I’m	the	best	botanist	on	the	planet.
One	big	bonus:	Email!	Just	like	the	days	back	on	Hermes,	I	get	data dumps.	Of	course	they	relay	email	from	friends	and	family,	but	NASA also	sends	along	choice	messages	from	the	public.	I’ve	gotten	email	from rock	stars,	athletes,	actors	and	actresses,	and	even	the	President.
The	coolest	one	is	from	my	alma-mater,	the	University	of	Chicago. They	say	once	you	grow	crops	somewhere,	you	have	officially “colonized”	it.	So	technically,	I	colonized	Mars.
In	your	face,	Neil	Armstrong!
I	go	to	the	rover	five	times	a	day	to	check	mail.	They	can	get	a message	from	Earth	to	Mars,	but	they	can’t	get	it	another	10	meters	to	the Hab.	But	hey,	I	can’t	bitch.	My	odds	of	living	through	this	are	way	higher now.
Last	I	heard,	they	solved	the	weight	problem	on	Ares	4’s	MDV.	Once
it	lands	here,	they’ll	ditch	the	heat	shield,	all	the	life	support	stuff,	and	a bunch	of	empty	fuel	tanks.	Then	they	can	take	the	seven	of	us	(Ares	4’s crew	plus	me)	all	the	way	to	Schiaparelli.	They’re	already	working	on	my duties	for	the	surface	ops.	How	cool	is	that?
In	other	news,	I’m	learning	Morse	Code.	Why?	Because	it’s	our	backup	communication	system.	NASA	figured	a	decades-old	probe	isn’t	ideal as	a	sole	means	of	communication.
If	Pathfinder	craps	out,	I’ll	spell	messages	with	rocks,	which	NASA will	see	with	satellites.	They	can’t	reply,	but	at	least	we’d	have	one-way communication.	Why	Morse	Code?	Because	making	dots	and	dashes	with rocks	is	a	lot	easier	than	making	letters.
It’s	a	shitty	way	to	communicate.	Hopefully	it	won’t	come	up.

All	chemical	reactions	complete,	the	sheet	was	sterilized	and	moved to	a	cleanroom.	There,	a	worker	cut	a	strip	off	the	edge.	Dividing	the strip	in	to	squares,	he	put	each	through	a	series	of	rigorous	tests.
Having	passed	inspection,	the	sheet	was	then	cut	to	shape.	The	edges were	folded	over,	sewn,	and	resealed	with	resin.	A	man	with	a	clipboard made	final	inspections,	independently	verifying	the	measurements,	then approved	it	for	use.


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	115

The	meddling	botanists	have	grudgingly	admitted	I	did	a	good	job. They	agree	I’ll	have	enough	food	to	last	till	Sol	900.	Bearing	that	in mind,	NASA	has	fleshed	out	the	mission	details	of	the	supply	probe.
At	first,	they	were	working	on	a	desperate	plan	to	get	a	probe	here before	Sol	400.	But	I	bought	another	500	sols	of	life	with	my	potato	farm so	they	have	more	time	to	work	on	it.
They’ll	launch	next	year	during	the	Hohmann	Transfer	Window,	and it’ll	take	almost	9	months	to	get	here.	It	should	arrive	around	Sol	856. It’ll	have	plenty	of	food,	a	spare	Oxygenator,	Water	Reclaimer,	and comm	system.	Three	comm	systems,	actually.	I	guess	they	aren’t	taking any	chances,	what	with	my	habit	of	being	nearby	when	radios	break.
Got	my	first	email	from	Hermes	today.	NASA’s	been	limiting	direct contact.	I	guess	they’re	afraid	I’ll	say	something	like	“You	abandoned	me on	Mars	you	fuckwits!”	I	know	the	crew	is	surprised	to	hear	from	the Ghost	of	Mars	Missions	Past,	but	c’mon.	I	wish	NASA	was	less	of	a nanny	sometimes.	Anyway,	they	finally	let	one	email	through	from Martinez:

Dear	Watney:	Sorry	we	left	you	behind,	but	we don't	like	you.	You're	sort	of	a	smart-ass.	And it's	a	lot	roomier	on	Hermes	without	you.	We	have to	take	turns	doing	your	tasks,	but	it's	only botany	(not	real	science)	so	it's	easy.	How's
Mars?
-Martinez

My	reply:

Dear	Martinez:	Mars	is	fine.	When	I	get	lonely
I	think	of	that	steamy	night	I	spent	with	your mom.	How	are	things	on	Hermes?	Cramped	and claustrophobic?	Yesterday	I	went	outside	and looked	at	the	vast	horizons.	I	tell	ya,	Martinez, they	go	on	forever!
-Watney


The	employees	carefully	folded	the	sheet,	and	placed	it	in	an	argonfilled	airtight	shipping	container.	Printing	out	a	sticker,	the	man	with	the clipboard	placed	it	on	the	package.	“Project	Ares-3;	Hab	Canvas;	Sheet
AL102.”
The	package	was	placed	on	a	charter	plane	and	flown	to	Edwards	Air Force	Base	in	California.	It	flew	abnormally	high,	at	great	cost	of	fuel,	to ensure	a	smoother	flight.
Upon	arrival,	the	package	was	carefully	transported	by	special convoy	to	Pasadena.	Once	there,	it	was	moved	to	the	JPL	White	Room	for probe	assembly.	Over	the	next	5	weeks,	engineers	in	white	bodysuits assembled	Presupply	309.	It	contained	AL102	as	well	as	12	other	Hab Canvas	packages.
LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	116
It’s	almost	time	for	the	second	harvest.
Ayup.
I	wish	I	had	a	straw	hat	and	some	suspenders.
My	re-seed	of	the	potatoes	went	well.	I'm	beginning	to	see	that	crops on	Mars	are	extremely	prolific,	thanks	to	the	billions	of	dollars	worth	of life	support	equipment	around	me.	I	now	have	400	healthy	potato	plants, each	one	making	lots	of	calorie-filled	taters	for	my	dining	enjoyment.	In just	ten	days	they’ll	be	ripe!
And	this	time,	I’m	not	replanting	them	as	seed.	This	is	my	food supply.	All	natural,	organic,	Martian-grown	potatoes.	Don’t	hear	that every	day,	do	you?
You	may	be	wondering	how	I’ll	store	them.	I	can’t	just	pile	them	up; most	of	them	would	go	bad	before	I	got	around	to	eating	them.	So instead,	I’ll	do	something	that	wouldn’t	work	at	all	on	Earth:	Throw	them outside.
Most	of	the	water	will	be	sucked	out	by	the	near-vacuum;	what’s	left will	freeze	solid.	Any	bacteria	planning	to	rot	my	taters	will	die screaming.
In	other	news,	I	got	email	from	Venkat	Kapoor:
Mark,	some	answers	to	your	earlier	questions:
No,	we	will	not	tell	our	Botany	Team	to	“Go .... themselves.”	I	understand	you’ve	been	on	your own	for	a	long	time,	but	we’re	in	the	loop	now,
and	it’s	best	if	you	listen	to	what	we	have	to say.
The	Cubs	finished	the	season	at	the	bottom	of the	NL	Central.
The	data	transfer	rate	just	isn’t	good	enough for	the	size	of	music	files,	even	in	compressed formats.	So	your	request	for	“Anything,	oh	god ANYTHING	but	Disco”	is	denied.	Enjoy	your	boogie fever.
Also,	an	uncomfortable	side	note...	NASA	is putting	together	a	committee.	They	want	to	see	if there	were	any	avoidable	mistakes	that	led	you	to being	stranded.	Just	a	heads-up.	They	may	have questions	for	you	later	on.
Keep	us	posted	on	your	activities.
-Kapoor

My	reply:

Venkat,	tell	the	investigation	committee they’ll	have	to	do	their	witch-hunt	without	me. And	when	they	inevitably	blame	Commander	Lewis,	be advised	I’ll	publicly	refute	it.
Also	please	tell	them	that	each	and	every	one of	their	mothers	are	prostitutes.
-Watney
	PS:	Their	sisters,	too.


The	presupply	probes	for	Ares-3	launched	on	14	consecutive	days during	the	Hohmann	Transfer	window.	Presupply	309	was	launched	third. The	251	day	trip	to	Mars	was	uneventful,	needing	only	two	minor	course adjustments.
After	several	aerobraking	maneuvers	to	slow	down,	it	made	its	final descent	toward	Acidalia	Planitia.	First,	it	endured	reentry	via	a	heat shield.	Later,	it	released	a	parachute	and	detached	the	now	expended shield.
Once	its	onboard	radar	detected	it	was	30	meters	from	the	ground,	it cut	loose	the	parachute	and	inflated	balloons	all	around	its	hull.	It	fell unceremoniously	to	the	surface,	bouncing	and	rolling,	until	it	finally came	to	rest.
Deflating	its	balloons,	the	onboard	computer	reported	the	successful landing	back	to	Earth.
Then	it	waited	23	months.


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	117

The	Water	Reclaimer	is	acting	up.
Six	people	will	go	through	18	liters	of	water	per	day.	So	it’s	made	to process	20.	But	lately,	it	hasn’t	been	keeping	up.	It’s	doing	10,	tops.
Do	I	generate	10	liters	of	water	per	day?	No,	I’m	not	the	urinating champion	of	all	time.	It’s	the	crops.	The	humidity	inside	the	Hab	is	a	lot higher	than	it	was	designed	for,	so	the	Water	Reclaimer	is	constantly filtering	it	out	of	the	air.
I’m	not	worried	about	it.	Water	is	water.	The	plants	use	it,	I	use	it.	If need	be,	I	can	piss	on	the	plants	directly.	It’ll	evaporate	and	condense	on the	walls.	I	could	make	something	to	collect	it,	I’m	sure.	Thing	is,	the water	can’t	go	anywhere.	It’s	a	closed	system.	Plus,	I	made	like	600	liters from	MDV	fuel	(remember	the	“explosive	Hab”	incident?).	I	could	take baths	and	still	have	plenty	left	over.
NASA,	however,	is	absolutely	shitting	itself.	They	see	the	Water Reclaimer	as	a	critical	survival	element.	There’s	no	backup,	and	they think	I’ll	die	instantly	without	it.	To	them,	equipment	failure	is terrifying.	To	me,	it’s	“Tuesday.”
So	instead	of	preparing	for	my	harvest,	I	have	to	make	extra	trips	to and	from	the	rover	to	answer	their	questions.	Each	new	message	instructs me	to	try	some	new	solution	and	report	the	results	back.
So	far	we’ve	worked	out	it’s	not	the	electronics,	refrigeration	system, instrumentation,	or	temperature.	I’m	sure	it’ll	turn	out	to	be	a	little	hole somewhere,	then	NASA	will	have	4	hours	of	meetings	before	telling	me to	cover	it	with	duct	tape.
Lewis	and	Beck	opened	Presupply	309.	Working	as	best	they	could	in their	bulky	EVA	suits,	they	removed	the	various	portions	of	Hab	canvas and	lay	them	on	the	ground.	Three	entire	presupply	probes	were dedicated	to	the	Hab.
Following	a	procedure	they	had	practiced	hundreds	of	times,	they efficiently	assembled	the	pieces.	Special	seal-strips	between	the	patches ensured	air-tight	mating.
After	erecting	the	main	structure	of	the	Hab,	they	assembled	the	three airlocks.	Sheet	AL102	had	a	hole	perfectly	sized	for	Airlock	1.	Beck 	stretched	the	sheet	tight	to	the	seal-strips	on	the	airlock’s	exterior.
Once	all	airlocks	were	in	place,	Lewis	flooded	the	Hab	with	air	and AL102	felt	pressure	for	the	first	time.	They	waited	an	hour.	No	pressure was	lost;	the	setup	had	been	perfect.
LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	118
My	conversation	with	NASA	about	the	Water	Reclaimer	was	boring and	riddled	with	technical	details.	So	I’ll	paraphrase	it	for	you:
Me:	“This	is	obviously	a	clog.	How	about	I	take	the	it	apart	and	check the	internal	tubing?”
NASA:	(After	5	hours	of	deliberation)	“No.	You’ll	....	it	up	and die.”
So	I	took	it	apart.
Yeah,	I	know.	NASA	has	a	lot	of	ultra-smart	people	and	I	should really	do	what	they	say.	And	I’m	being	too	adversarial,	considering	they spend	all	day	working	on	how	to	save	my	life.
I	just	get	sick	of	being	told	how	to	wipe	my	ass.	Independence	was one	of	the	things	they	looked	for	when	choosing	Ares	astronauts.	It’s	a
13-month	mission,	most	of	it	spent	many	light-minutes	away	from	Earth. They	wanted	people	who	would	act	on	their	own	initiative,	but	at	the same	time,	obey	their	Commander.
If	Commander	Lewis	were	here,	I’d	do	whatever	she	said,	no problem.	But	a	committee	of	faceless	bureaucrats	back	on	Earth?	Sorry, I’m	just	having	a	tough	time	with	it.
I	was	really	careful.	I	labeled	every	piece	as	I	dismantled	it,	and	laid everything	out	on	a	table.	I	have	the	schematics	in	the	computer,	so nothing	was	a	surprise.
And	just	as	I’d	suspected,	there	was	a	clogged	tube.	The	Water
Reclaimer	was	designed	to	purify	urine	and	strain	humidity	out	of	the	air (you	exhale	almost	as	much	water	as	you	piss).	I’ve	mixed	my	water	with
soil,	making	it	mineral	water.	The	minerals	built	up	in	the	Water Reclaimer.
I	cleaned	out	the	tubing	and	put	it	all	back	together.	It	completely solved	the	problem.	I’ll	have	to	do	it	again	some	day,	but	not	for	100	sols or	so.	No	big	deal.
I	told	NASA	what	I	did.	Our	(paraphrased)	conversation	was: Me:	“I	took	it	apart,	found	the	problem,	and	fixed	it.” NASA:
“.....”
AL102	shuddered	in	the	brutal	storm.	Withstanding	forces	and pressure	far	greater	than	its	design,	it	rippled	violently	against	the airlock	seal-strip.	Other	sections	of	canvas	undulated	along	their	sealstrips	together,	acting	as	a	single	sheet,	but	AL102	had	no	such	luxury. The	airlock	barely	moved,	leaving	AL102	to	take	the	full	force	of	the tempest.
The	layers	of	plastic,	constantly	bending,	heated	the	resin	from	pure friction.	The	new,	more	yielding	environment	allowed	the	carbon	fibers	to separate.
AL102	stretched.
Not	much.	Only	4	millimeters.	But	the	carbon	fibers,	usually	500 microns	apart,	now	had	a	gap	eight	times	that	width	in	their	midst.
After	the	storm	abated,	the	lone	remaining	astronaut	performed	a	full inspection	of	the	Hab.	But	he	didn’t	notice	anything	amiss.	The	weak	part of	canvas	was	concealed	by	a	seal-strip.
Designed	for	a	mission	of	31	sols,	AL102	continued	well	past	its planned	expiration.	Sol	after	sol	went	by,	with	the	lone	astronaut traveling	in	and	out	of	the	Hab	almost	daily.	Airlock	1	was	closest	to	the rover	charging	station,	so	the	astronaut	preferred	it	to	the	other	two.
When	pressurized,	the	airlock	expanded	slightly;	when	depressurized, it	shrunk.	Every	time	the	astronaut	used	the	airlock,	the	strain	on	AL102 relaxed,	then	tightened	anew.
Pulling,	stressing,	weakening,	stretching...


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	119

I	woke	up	last	night	to	the	Hab	shaking.
The	medium-grade	sandstorm	ended	as	suddenly	as	it	began.	It	was only	a	category	3	storm	with	50kph	winds.	Nothing	to	worry	about.	Still, it’s	bit	disconcerting	to	hear	howling	winds	when	you’re	used	to	utter silence.
I’m	worried	about	Pathfinder.	If	the	sandstorm	damaged	it,	I’ll	have lost	my	connection	to	NASA.	Logically,	I	shouldn’t	worry.	The	thing’s been	on	the	surface	for	decades.	A	little	gale	won’t	do	any	harm.
When	I	head	outside,	I’ll	confirm	Pathfinder’s	still	functional	before moving	on	to	the	sweaty,	annoying	work	of	the	day.
Yes,	with	each	sandstorm	comes	the	inevitable	Cleaning	of	the	Solar Cells.	A	time	honored	tradition	by	hearty	Martians	such	as	myself.	It reminds	me	of	growing	up	in	Chicago	and	having	to	shovel	snow.	I’ll give	my	dad	credit;	he	never	claimed	it	was	to	build	character	or	teach me	the	value	of	hard	work.
“Snow-blowers	are	expensive,”	he	used	to	say.	“You’re	free.”
Once,	I	tried	to	appeal	to	my	mom.	“Don’t	be	such	a	wuss,”	She suggested.
In	other	news,	It’s	seven	sols	till	the	harvest,	and	I	still	haven’t prepared.	For	starters,	I	need	to	make	a	hoe.	Also,	I	need	to	make	an outdoor	shed	for	the	potatoes.	I	can’t	just	pile	them	up	outside.	The	next major	storm	would	cause	The	Great	Martian	Potato	Migration.
Anyway,	all	that	will	have	to	wait.	I’ve	got	a	full	day	today.	After cleaning	the	solar	cells,	I	have	to	check	the	whole	solar	array	make	sure the	storm	didn’t	hurt	it.	Then	I’ll	need	to	do	the	same	for	the	rover. I	better	get	started.


Airlock	1	slowly	depressurized	to	1/90th	of	an	atmosphere.	Watney, donning	an	EVA	suit,	waited	for	it	to	complete.	He	had	done	it	literally hundreds	of	times.	Any	apprehension	he	may	have	had	on	Sol	1	was	long gone.	Now	it	was	merely	a	boring	chore	before	exiting	to	the	surface.
As	the	depressurization	continued,	the	Hab’s	atmosphere	compressed the	airlock	and	AL102	stretched	for	the	last	time.
On	Sol	119,	the	Hab	breached.
The	initial	tear	was	less	than	1	millimeter.	The	perpendicular	carbon fibers	should	have	prevented	the	rip	from	growing.	But	countless	abuses had	stretched	the	vertical	fibers	apart	and	weakened	the	horizontal	ones beyond	use.
The	full	force	of	the	Hab’s	atmosphere	rushed	through	the	breach. Within	a	tenth	of	a	second,	the	rip	was	a	meter	long,	running	parallel	to the	seal-strip.	It	propagated	all	the	way	around	until	it	met	its	starting point.	The	airlock	was	no	longer	attached	to	the	Hab.
The	unopposed	pressure	violently	launched	the	airlock	like	a cannonball	as	the	Hab	exploded.	Inside,	the	surprised	Watney	slammed against	the	airlock’s	back	door	with	the	force	of	the	expulsion.
The	airlock	flew	40	meters	before	hitting	the	ground.	Watney,	barely recovered	from	the	earlier	shock,	now	endured	another	as	he	hit	the	front door,	face	first.
His	faceplate	took	the	brunt	of	the	blow,	the	safety	glass	shattering into	hundreds	of	small	cubes.	His	head	slammed	against	the	inside	of	the helmet,	knocking	him	senseless.
The	airlock	tumbled	across	the	surface	for	a	further	15	meters.	The heavy	padding	of	Watney’s	suit	saved	him	from	many	broken	bones.	He tried	to	make	sense	of	the	situation,	but	was	barely	conscious.
Finally	done	tumbling,	the	airlock	rested	on	its	side	amid	a	cloud	of dust.
Watney,	on	his	back,	stared	blankly	upward	through	the	hole	in	his shattered	faceplate.	A	gash	in	his	forehead	trickled	blood	down	his	face.
Regaining	some	of	his	wits,	he	got	his	bearings.	Turning	his	head	to the	side,	he	looked	through	the	back	door’s	window.	The	collapsed	Hab rippled	in	the	distance,	a	junkyard	of	debris	strewn	across	the	landscape in	front	of	it.
Then,	a	hissing	sound	reached	his	ears.	Listening	carefully,	he realized	it	was	not	coming	from	his	suit.	Somewhere	in	the	phone-booth sized	airlock,	a	small	breach	was	letting	air	escape.
He	listened	intently	to	the	hiss.	Then	he	touched	his	broken	faceplate.
Then	he	looked	out	the	window	again.
“You	....	kidding	me?”	He	said.
Chapter	14
AUDIO	LOG:	SOL	119 RECORDING:
I’ve	been	laying	here	for	a	little	while,	trying	to	figure	out	what happened.	I	should	be	more	upset,	but	I	took	a	pretty	good	whack	to	the head.	It	had	a	calming	effect.
So…
Well,	ok.
I’m	in	the	airlock.	I	can	see	the	Hab	out	the	window;	it’s	a	good	50 meters	away.	Normally,	the	airlock	is	attached	to	the	Hab.	So	that’s	a problem.
The	airlock’s	on	its	side,	and	I	can	hear	a	steady	hiss.	So	either	it’s leaking	or	there	are	snakes	in	here.	Either	way,	I’m	in	trouble.
Also,	during	the…	whatever	the	....	happened…	I	got	bounced around	like	a	pinball	and	smashed	my	faceplate.	Air	is	notoriously uncooperative	when	it	comes	to	giant,	gaping	holes	in	your	EVA	suit.
Looks	like	the	Hab	is	completely	deflated	and	collapsed.	So	even	if	I had	a	functional	EVA	suit	to	leave	the	airlock	with,	I	wouldn’t	have anywhere	to	go.	So	that	sucks.
I	gotta’	think	for	a	minute.	And	I	have	to	get	out	of	this	EVA	suit.	It’s bulky,	and	the	airlock	is	cramped.	Besides,	it’s	not	like	it’s	doing	me	any good.
AUDIO	LOG:	SOL	119 RECORDING:
Things	aren’t	as	bad	as	they	seem.
I’m	still	....,	mind	you.	Just	not	as	deeply.
Not	sure	what	happened	to	the	Hab,	but	the	rover’s	probably	fine.	It’s not	ideal,	but	at	least	it’s	not	leaky	phone	booth.
I’m	wearing	Beck’s	EVA	suit.	I	haven’t	worn	my	own	since	Sol	6 when	I	got	shish-kabobed.	Beck’s	suit	was	about	the	right	size	and	didn’t have	a	hole	in	it.	Why	does	that	matter	right	now?	Because,	unlike	my original	suit,	this	one	still	has	an	unused	patch	kit.
Don’t	get	excited.	It	won’t	do	the	suit	any	good.	The	patch	kit	is	a cone-shaped	valve	with	super	sticky	resin	on	the	wide	end.	It’s	just	too small	to	deal	with	a	hole	larger	than	8cm.	And	really,	if	you	have	a	9cm hole,	you’re	going	to	be	dead	way	before	you	could	whip	out	the	kit.
Still,	it’s	an	asset,	and	maybe	I	can	use	it	to	stop	the	airlock	leak.	And that’s	my	top	priority	right	now.
It’s	a	small	leak.	With	the	faceplate	gone,	the	EVA	suit	is	effectively managing	the	whole	airlock.	It’s	been	adding	air	to	make	up	for	the missing	pressure.	But	it’ll	run	out	eventually.
I	need	to	find	the	leak.	I	think	it’s	near	my	feet,	judging	by	the	sound.
Now	that	I’m	out	of	the	suit,	I	can	turn	around	and	get	a	look…
I	don’t	see	anything…	I	can	hear	it,	but…	it’s	down	here	somewhere, but	I	don’t	know	where.
I	can	only	think	of	one	way	to	find	it:	Start	a	fire!
Yeah,	I	know.	A	lot	of	my	ideas	involve	setting	something	on	fire. And	yes,	deliberately	starting	a	fire	in	a	tiny,	enclosed	space	is	usually	a terrible	idea.	But	I	need	the	smoke.	Just	a	little	wisp	of	it.
As	usual,	I’m	working	with	stuff	that	was	deliberately	designed	not	to burn.	But	no	amount	of	careful	design	by	NASA	can	get	around	a determined	arsonist	with	a	tank	of	pure	oxygen.
	The	EVA	suit	is	made	entirely	of	non-flammable	materials.	So	is	the airlock.	My	clothes	are	fireproof	as	well,	even	the	thread.
I	was	originally	planning	to	check	the	solar	array,	doing	repairs	as needed	after	last	night’s	storm.	So	I	have	my	toolbox	with	me.	But looking	through	it,	it’s	all	metal	or	non-flammable	plastic.
I	just	realized	I	do	have	something	flammable:	My	own	hair.	It’ll have	to	do.	There’s	a	sharp	knife	in	the	tool-kit.	I’ll	shave	some	arm	hairs off	into	a	little	pile.
Next	step:	oxygen.	Back	when	I	turned	the	hydrazine	into	water,	I	had tubing,	garbage	bags,	and	all	sorts	of	other	luxuries.	I	won’t	have anything	so	refined	is	a	pure	oxygen	flow.	All	I	can	do	is	muck	with	the EVA	suit	controls	to	increase	oxygen	percentage	in	the	whole	airlock.	I figure	bumping	it	to	40%	will	do.
All	I	need	now	is	a	spark.
The	EVA	suit	has	electronics,	but	it	runs	on	very	low	voltage.	I	don’t think	I	could	get	an	arc	with	it.	Besides,	I	don’t	want	to	tear	up	my	suit’s electronics.	I	need	it	working	to	get	from	the	airlock	to	the	rover.
The	airlock	itself	has	electronics,	but	it	ran	on	Hab	power.	I	guess NASA	never	considered	what	would	happen	if	it	was	launched	50	meters.
Lazy	bums.
Plastic	might	not	burn,	but	anyone	whose	played	with	a	balloon knows	it’s	great	at	building	up	static	charge.	Once	I	do	that,	I	should	be able	to	make	a	spark	just	by	touching	a	metal	tool.
Fun	fact:	This	is	exactly	how	the	Apollo	1	crew	died.	Wish	me	luck!


AUDIO	LOG:	SOL	119 RECORDING:

I’m	in	a	box	full	of	burning	hair	smell.	It’s	not	a	good	smell.
On	my	first	try,	the	fire	lit,	but	the	smoke	just	drifted	randomly around.	My	own	breathing	was	screwing	it	up.	So	I	held	my	breath	and tried	again.
My	second	try,	the	EVA	suit	threw	everything	off.	There’s	a	gentle flow	of	air	coming	out	of	the	faceplate	as	the	suit	constantly	replaces	the missing	air.	So	I	shut	the	suit	down,	held	my	breath,	and	tried	again.	I	had to	be	quick;	the	pressure	was	dropping.
My	third	try,	the	quick	arm	movements	I	used	to	set	the	fire	messed everything	up.	Just	moving	around	makes	enough	turbulence	to	send	the smoke	everywhere.
The	fourth	time	I	kept	the	suit	turned	off,	held	my	breath,	and	when the	time	came	to	light	the	fire,	I	did	it	very	slowly.	Then	I	watched	as	the little	wisp	of	smoke	drifted	toward	the	floor	of	the	airlock,	disappearing through	a	hairline	fracture.
I	have	you	now,	little	leak!
I	gasped	for	air	and	turned	the	EVA	suit	back	on.	The	pressure	had dropped	to	0.9	atmospheres	during	my	little	experiment.	But	there	was plenty	of	oxygen	in	the	air	for	me	any	my	hair-fire	to	breathe.	The	suit quickly	got	things	back	to	normal.
Looking	at	the	fracture,	it’s	pretty	tiny.	It	would	be	a	cinch	to	seal	it with	the	suit’s	patch	kit,	but	now	that	I	think	about	it,	that’s	a	bad	idea.
I’ll	need	to	do	some	kind	of	repair	to	the	faceplate.	I	don’t	know	how just	yet,	but	the	patch	kit	and	its	pressure-resistant	resin	is	probably really	important.	And	I	can’t	do	it	bit	by	bit,	either.	Once	I	break	the	seal on	the	patch	kit,	the	binary	components	of	the	resin	mix	and	I	have	60 seconds	before	it	hardens.	I	can’t	just	take	a	little	to	fix	the	crack.
Given	time,	I	might	be	able	to	come	up	with	a	plan	for	the	faceplate. Then,	I	could	take	a	few	seconds	during	that	plan	to	scrape	resin	over	the airlock	fracture.	But	I	don’t	have	time.
I’m	down	to	40%	of	my	N2	tank.	I	need	to	seal	that	fracture	now,	and I	need	to	do	it	without	using	the	patch	kit.
First	idea:	Little	Dutch	Boy.	I’m	licking	my	palm	and	placing	it	over the	crack.
Ok…	I	can’t	quite	make	a	perfect	seal,	so	there’s	airflow…	getting colder	now…	getting	pretty	uncomfortable…	ok	....	this.
On	to	idea	number	two.	Tape!
I	have	duct	tape	in	my	tool	box.	Let’s	slap	some	on	and	see	if	it	slows the	flow.	I	wonder	how	long	it	will	last	before	the	pressure	rips	it.	Putting it	on	now.
There	we	go…	still	holding…
Lemme	check	the	suit…	Readouts	say	the	pressure	is	stable.	Looks like	the	duct	tape	made	a	good	seal.
Let’s	see	if	it	holds…
AUDIO	LOG:	SOL	119 RECORDING:
It’s	been	15	minutes,	and	the	tape	is	still	holding.	Looks	like	that problem	is	solved.
Sort	of	anticlimactic,	really.	I	was	already	working	out	how	to	cover the	breach	with	ice.	I	have	2	liters	of	water	in	the	EVA	suit’s	“hamsterfeeder”.	I	could	have	shut	off	the	suit’s	heating	systems	and	let	the airlock	cool	to	freezing.	Then	I’d…	well	whatever.
Coulda’	done	it	with	ice.	I’m	just	sayin’.
All	right.	On	to	my	next	problem:	How	do	I	fix	the	EVA	suit?	Duct tape	might	seal	a	hairline	crack,	but	it	can’t	hold	an	atmosphere	of pressure	against	the	size	of	my	broken	faceplate.
The	patch	kit	is	too	small,	but	still	useful.	I	can	spread	the	resin around	the	edge	of	where	the	faceplate	was,	then	stick	something	on	to cover	the	hole.	Problem	is,	what	do	I	use	to	cover	the	hole?	Something that	can	stand	up	to	a	lot	of	pressure.
Looking	around,	the	only	thing	I	see	that	can	hold	an	atmosphere	is the	EVA	suit	itself.	There’s	plenty	of	material	to	work	with,	and	I	can even	cut	it.	Remember	when	I	was	cutting	Hab	canvas	in	to	strips?	Those same	sheers	are	right	here	in	my	tool	kit.
Cutting	a	chunk	out	of	my	EVA	suit	leaves	it	with	another	hole.	But	a hole	I	can	control	the	shape	and	location	of.
Yeah…	I	think	I	see	a	solution	here.	I’m	going	to	cut	off	my	arm!
Well,	no.	Not	my	arm.	The	EVA	suit’s	arm.	I’ll	cut	right	below	the left	elbow.	Then	I	can	cut	along	its	length,	turning	it	into	a	rectangle.	It’ll be	big	enough	to	seal	the	faceplate,	and	it’ll	be	held	in	place	by	the	resin.
Material	designed	to	withstand	atmospheric	pressure?	Check.
Resin	designed	to	seal	a	breach	against	that	pressure?	Check.
And	what	about	the	gaping	hole	on	the	stumpy	arm?	Unlike	my faceplate,	the	suit’s	material	is	flexible.	I’ll	press	it	together	and	seal	it with	resin.	I’ll	have	to	press	my	left	arm	against	my	side	while	I’m	in	the suit,	but	there’ll	be	room.
I’ll	be	spreading	the	resin	pretty	thin,	but	it’s	literally	the	strongest adhesive	known	to	man.	And	it	doesn’t	have	to	be	a	perfect	seal.	It	just has	to	last	long	enough	for	me	to	get	to	safety.
And	where	will	that	“safety”	be?	Not	a	damn	clue.
Anyway,	one	problem	at	a	time.	Right	now	I’m	fixing	the	EVA	suit.


AUDIO	LOG:	SOL	119 RECORDING:

Cutting	the	arm	off	the	suit	was	easy;	so	was	cutting	along	its	length to	make	a	rectangle.	Those	sheers	are	strong	as	hell.
Cleaning	the	glass	off	the	faceplate	took	longer	than	I’d	expected.	It’s unlikely	it	would	puncture	EVA	suit	material,	but	I’m	not	taking	any chances.	Besides,	I	don’t	want	glass	in	my	face	when	I’m	wearing	it.
Then	came	the	tricky	part.	Once	I	broke	the	seal	on	the	patch	kit,	I had	60	seconds	before	the	resin	set.	I	scooped	it	off	the	patch	kit	with	my fingers	and	quickly	spread	it	around	the	rim	of	the	faceplate.	Then,	I	took what	was	left	and	sealed	the	arm	hole.
I	pressed	the	rectangle	of	suit	material	on	to	the	helmet.	I	held	it firmly	with	both	hands	while	using	my	knee	to	keep	pressure	on	the arm’s	seam.
I	held	on	until	I’d	counted	120	seconds.	Just	to	be	sure.
It	seemed	to	work	well.	The	seal	looked	strong	and	the	resin	was rock-hard.	I	did,	however,	glue	my	hand	to	the	helmet.
Stop	laughing.
In	retrospect,	using	my	fingers	to	spread	the	resin	wasn’t	the	best plan.	Fortunately,	my	left	hand	was	still	free.	After	some	grunting	and	a lot	of	profanities,	I	was	able	to	reach	the	tool	box.	Once	I	got	a
screwdriver	I	chiseled	myself	free	(feeling	really	stupid	the	whole	time.)
Using	the	arm	computer,	I	had	the	suit	overpressurize	to	1.2 atmospheres.	The	faceplate	patch	bowed	outward,	but	otherwise	held firm.	The	arm	filled	in,	threatening	to	tear	the	new	seam,	but	stayed	in one	piece.
Then	I	watched	the	readouts	to	see	how	airtight	things	were.
Answer:	Not	very.
The	suit	is	designed	for	8	hours	of	use.	That	works	out	to	250ml	of liquid	oxygen.	Just	to	be	safe,	the	suit	has	a	full	liter	of	O2	capacity.	But that’s	only	half	the	story.
The	rest	of	the	air	is	nitrogen.	It’s	just	there	to	add	pressure.	When	the suit	leaks,	that’s	what	it	backfills	with.	The	suit	has	2	liters	of	liquid	N2 storage.
It	absolutely	pissed	the	air	out.	In	60	seconds	it	leaked	so	much	it pressurized	the	whole	airlock	to	1.2	atmospheres.
Let’s	call	the	volume	of	the	airlock	2	cubic	meters.	The	inflated	EVA suit	probably	takes	up	half	of	it.	So	it	took	5	minutes	to	add	0.2 atmospheres	to	1	cubic	meter.	That’s	285g	of	air	(trust	me	on	the	math). The	air	in	the	tanks	is	around	1	gram	per	cubic	centimeter,	meaning	I	just lost	285ml.
The	three	tanks	combined	had	3000ml	to	start	with.	A	lot	of	that	was used	to	maintain	pressure	while	the	airlock	was	leaking.	Also,	my breathing	turned	some	oxygen	in	to	carbon	dioxide,	which	was	captured by	the	suit’s	CO2	filters.
Checking	the	readouts,	I	have	410ml	of	oxygen,	738ml	of	nitrogen. Together,	they	make	almost	1150ml	to	work	with.	That,	divided	by	285ml lost	per	minute…
Once	I’m	out	of	the	airlock,	this	EVA	suit	will	only	last	4	minutes. .....
AUDIO	LOG:	SOL	119 RECORDING:
Ok,	I’ve	been	thinking	some	more.
What	good	is	going	to	the	rover?	I’d	just	be	trapped	there	instead.	The extra	room	would	be	nice,	but	I’d	still	die	eventually.	No	Water
Reclaimer,	no	Oxygenator,	no	food.	Take	your	pick;	all	of	those	problems are	fatal.
I	need	to	fix	the	Hab.	I	know	what	to	do;	we	practiced	it	in	training. But	it’ll	take	a	long	time.	I’ll	have	to	scrounge	around	in	the	nowcollapsed	canvas	to	get	the	spare	material	for	patching.	Then	I	have	to find	the	breach	and	seal-strip	a	patch	in	place.
But	it’ll	take	hours	to	repair	and	my	EVA	suit	is	shit.
I’ll	need	another	suit.	Martinez’s	used	to	be	in	the	rover.	I	hauled	it all	the	way	to	the	Pathfinder	site	and	back,	just	in	case	I	needed	a	spare.
But	when	I	returned,	I	put	it	back	in	the	Hab.
Damn	it!
All	right,	so	I’ll	need	to	get	another	suit	before	going	to	the	rover. Which	one?	Johanssen’s	is	too	small	for	me	(tiny	little	gal,	our
Johanssen).	Lewis’s	is	full	of	water.	Actually,	by	now	it’s	full	of	slowly sublimating	ice.	The	mangled,	glued	together	suit	I	have	with	me	is Beck’s;	my	original	suit	has	a	hole	in	it.	That	just	leaves	Martinez	and Vogel.
I	left	Martinez’s	near	my	bunk,	in	case	I	needed	a	suit	in	a	hurry.	Of course,	after	that	sudden	decompression,	it	could	be	anywhere.	Still,	it’s	a place	to	start.
Next	problem:	I’m	like	50	meters	from	the	Hab.	Running	in	0.4g while	wearing	a	bulky	EVA	suit	isn’t	easy.	At	best,	I	can	trundle	2	meters per	second.	That’s	a	precious	25	seconds;	almost	an	eighth	of	my	4 minutes.	I’ve	got	to	bring	that	down.
But	how?


AUDIO	LOG:	SOL	119 RECORDING:

I’ll	roll	the	damn	airlock.
It’s	basically	a	phone	booth	on	its	side.	I	did	some	experiments.
I	figured	if	I	want	it	to	roll,	I’ll	need	to	hit	the	wall	as	hard	as possible.	And	I	have	to	be	in	the	air	at	the	time.	I	can’t	press	against	some other	part	of	the	airlock.	The	forces	would	cancel	and	it	wouldn’t	move	at all.
First	I	tried	launching	myself	off	one	wall	and	slamming	in	to	the other.	The	airlock	slid	a	little,	but	that’s	it.
Next,	I	tried	doing	a	super-pushup	to	get	airborne	(0.4g	yay!)	then kicking	the	wall	with	both	feet.	Again,	it	just	slid.
The	third	time,	I	got	it	right.	The	trick	is	to	plant	both	my	feet	on	the ground,	near	the	wall.	Then	I	launch	myself	to	the	top	of	the	opposite wall	and	hit	with	my	back.	When	I	tried	that	just	now,	it	was	enough force	and	leverage	to	tip	the	airlock	and	roll	it	one	face	toward	the	Hab.
The	airlock	is	a	meter	wide,	so…	sigh…	I	have	to	do	it	like	50	more times.
I’m	gonna	have	a	hell	of	a	backache	after	this.


AUDIO	LOG:	SOL	120 RECORDING:

I	have	a	hell	of	a	backache.
The	subtle	and	refined	“hurl	my	body	at	the	wall”	technique	had	some flaws.	It	only	worked	one	out	of	every	10	tries,	and	it	hurt	a	lot.	I	had	to take	breaks,	stretch	out,	and	generally	convince	myself	to	body-slam	the wall	again	and	again.
It	took	all	damn	night,	but	I	made	it.
I’m	10	meters	from	the	Hab	now.	I	can’t	get	any	closer,	cause	the debris	from	the	decompression	is	all	over	the	place.	This	isn’t	an	“allterrain”	airlock.	I	can’t	roll	over	that	shit.
It	was	morning	when	the	Hab	popped.	Now	it’s	morning	again.	I’ve been	in	this	damn	box	for	an	entire	day.	But	I’m	leaving	soon.
I’m	in	the	EVA	suit	now,	and	ready	to	roll.
All	right…	ok….	Once	more	through	the	plan:	Use	the	manual	valves to	equalize	the	airlock.	Get	out	and	hurry	to	the	Hab.	Wander	around under	the	collapsed	canvas.	Find	Martinez’s	suit	(or	Vogel’s	if	I	run	in	to it	first).	Get	to	the	rover.	Then	I’m	safe.
If	I	run	out	of	time	before	finding	a	suit,	I’ll	just	run	to	the	rover.	I’d be	in	trouble,	but	I’d	have	time	to	think	and	materials	to	work	with. Deep	breath…	here	we	go!


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	120

I’m	alive!	And	I’m	in	the	rover!
Things	didn’t	go	exactly	as	planned,	but	I’m	not	dead,	so	it’s	a	win.
Equalizing	the	airlock	went	fine.	I	was	out	on	the	surface	within	30 seconds.	Skipping	toward	the	Hab	(the	fastest	way	to	move	in	this gravity)	I	passed	through	the	field	of	debris.	The	rupture	had	really	sent things	flying,	myself	included.
It	was	hard	to	see;	my	faceplate	was	covered	by	the	makeshift	patch. Fortunately,	my	arm	had	a	camera.	NASA	discovered	that	turning	your whole	EVA-suited	body	to	look	at	something	was	a	strenuous	waste	of time.	So	they	mounted	a	small	camera	on	the	right	arm.	The	feed	is projected	on	the	inner	faceplate.	This	allows	us	to	look	at	things	just	by pointing	at	them.
I	had	to	look	at	a	rippled,	messed-up	version	of	the	outside	world.	The faceplate	patch	wasn’t	exactly	smooth	or	reflective.	Still,	it	was	enough to	see	what	was	going	on.
I	bee-lined	for	where	the	airlock	used	to	be.	I	knew	there	had	to	be	a pretty	big	hole	there,	so	I’d	be	able	to	get	in.	I	found	it	easily.	And	boy	is it	a	nasty	rip!	It’s	going	to	be	a	pain	in	the	ass	to	fix	it.
That’s	when	the	flaws	in	my	plan	started	to	reveal	themselves.	I	only had	one	arm	to	work	with.	My	left	arm	was	pinned	against	my	body, while	the	stumpy	arm	of	the	suit	bounced	freely.	So	as	I	moved	around under	the	canvas,	I	had	to	use	my	one	good	arm	to	hold	the	canvas	up.	It slowed	me	down.
From	what	I	could	see,	the	interior	of	the	Hab	is	chaos.	Everything’s moved.	Entire	tables	and	bunks	are	meters	away	from	where	they	started.
Lighter	objects	are	wildly	jumbled,	many	of	them	out	on	the	surface.
Everything’s	covered	in	soil	and	mangled	potato	plants.
Trudging	onward,	I	got	to	where	I’d	left	Martinez’s	suit.	To	my shock,	it	was	still	there!
“Yay!”	I	naively	thought.	“Problem	solved.”
Unfortunately,	the	suit	was	pinned	under	a	table,	which	was	held down	by	the	collapsed	canvas.	If	I’d	had	both	arms,	I	could	have	pulled	it free,	but	with	only	one	I	just	couldn’t	do	it.
Running	low	on	time,	I	detached	the	helmet.	Setting	it	aside,	I reached	past	the	table	to	get	Martinez’s	patch	kit.	I	found	it	with	the	help of	the	arm-camera.	I	dropped	it	in	the	helmet	and	hauled	ass	out	of	there.
Stumbling	to	the	rover,	I	barely	made	it	in	time.	My	ears	were popping	from	pressure	loss	just	as	the	rover’s	airlock	filled	with wonderful	1-atmosphere	air.
Crawling	in,	I	collapsed	and	panted	for	a	moment.
So	I’m	back	in	the	rover.	Just	like	I	was	back	on	the	Great	Pathfinder Recovery	Expedition.	Ugh.	At	least	this	time	it	smells	a	little	better.
NASA’s	probably	pretty	worried	about	me	by	now.	They	probably saw	the	airlock	move	back	to	the	Hab,	so	they	know	I’m	alive,	but	they’ll want	status.	And	as	it	happens,	it’s	the	rover	that	communicates	with Pathfinder.
I	tried	to	send	a	message	but	Pathfinder	isn’t	responding.	That’s	not	a big	surprise.	It’s	powered	directly	from	the	Hab,	and	the	Hab	is	offline. During	my	brief,	panicked	scramble	outside,	I	saw	Pathfinder	was	right where	I	left	it,	and	the	debris	didn’t	reach	that	far	out.	It	should	be	fine once	I	get	it	some	power.
As	for	my	current	situation,	the	big	gain	is	the	helmet.	They’re interchangeable,	so	I	can	replace	my	broken-ass	one	with	Martinez’s.	The stumpy	arm	is	still	an	issue,	but	the	faceplate	was	the	main	source	of leaks.	And	with	the	fresh	patch	kit,	I	can	seal	the	arm	with	more	resin.
But	that	can	wait.	I’ve	been	awake	for	over	24	hours.	I’m	not	in	any immediate	danger,	so	I’m	going	to	sleep.


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	121

Got	a	good	night’s	sleep,	and	made	real	progress	today.
First	thing	I	did	was	re-seal	the	arm.	Last	time,	I	had	to	spread	the resin	pretty	thin;	I’d	used	most	of	it	for	the	faceplate	patch.	But	this	time I	had	a	whole	patch	kit	just	for	the	arm.	I	got	a	perfect	seal.
I	still	only	had	a	one-armed	suit,	but	at	least	it	didn’t	leak.
I’d	lost	most	of	my	air	yesterday,	but	I	had	a	half-hour	of	oxygen	left.
Like	I	said	earlier,	a	human	body	doesn’t	need	much	oxygen.	Maintaining pressure	was	the	problem.
With	that	much	time,	I	was	able	to	take	advantage	of	the	rover’s	EVA tank-refill.	Something	I	couldn’t	do	with	the	leaky	suit.
The	tank-refill	is	an	emergency	measure.	The	expected	use	of	the rover	is	to	start	with	full	EVA	suits	and	come	back	with	air	to	spare.	It wasn’t	designed	for	long	trips,	or	even	overnighters.	But,	just	in	case	of emergency,	it	has	refill	hoses	mounted	on	the	exterior.	Inside	space	was limited	already,	and	NASA	concluded	most	air-related	emergencies would	be	outdoors.
But	refilling	is	slow,	slower	than	my	suit	was	leaking.	So	it	wasn’t any	use	to	me.	Now,	with	a	solid	suit	capable	of	holding	pressure, refilling	the	tanks	was	a	breeze.
After	refilling,	and	making	sure	the	suit	was	still	not	leaking,	I	had	a few	immediate	tasks	to	take	care	of.	Much	as	I	trust	my	handiwork,	I wanted	a	two-armed	suit.
I	ventured	back	in	to	the	Hab.	This	time,	not	being	rushed,	I	was	able to	use	a	pole	to	leverage	the	table	off	Martinez’s	suit.	Pulling	it	loose,	I dragged	it	back	to	the	rover.
After	a	thorough	diagnostic	to	be	sure,	I	finally	had	a	fully-functional EVA	suit!	It	took	me	two	trips	to	get	it,	but	I	got	it. Tomorrow,	I'll	fix	the	Hab.


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	122

The	first	thing	I	did	today	was	line	up	rocks	near	the	rover	to	spell “A-OK”.	That	should	make	NASA	happy.
I	went	in	to	the	Hab	again	to	assess	damage.	My	priority	will	be	to	get the	structure	intact	and	holding	pressure.	From	there,	I	can	work	on	fixing stuff	that	broke.
The	Hab	is	normally	a	dome,	with	flexible	support	poles	maintaining the	arch,	and	rigid,	folding	floor	material	to	keep	it	flat.	The	internal pressure	was	a	vital	part	of	its	support.	Without	it,	the	whole	thing collapsed.	I	inspected	the	poles,	and	none	of	them	had	broken.	They’re just	lying	flat	is	all.	I’ll	have	to	re-couple	a	few	of	them,	but	that’ll	be easy.
The	hole	where	Airlock	1	used	to	be	is	huge,	but	surmountable.	I	have seal-strips	and	spare	canvas.	It’ll	be	a	lot	of	work,	but	I	can	get	the	Hab together	again.	Once	I	do,	I’ll	re-establish	power	and	get	Pathfinder	back online.	From	there,	NASA	can	tell	me	how	to	fix	anything	I	can’t	figure out	on	my	own.
I’m	not	worried	about	any	of	that.	I	have	a	much	bigger	problem.
The	farm	is	dead.
With	a	complete	loss	of	pressure,	most	of	the	water	boiled	off.	Also, the	temperature	is	well	below	freezing.	Not	even	the	bacteria	in	the	soil can	survive	a	catastrophe	like	that.	Some	of	the	crops	were	in	pop-tents off	the	Hab.	But	they’re	dead,	too.	I	had	them	connected	directly	to	the Hab	via	hoses	to	maintain	air	supply	and	temperature.	When	the	Hab blew,	the	pop-tents	depressurized	as	well.	Even	if	they	hadn’t,	the freezing	cold	would	have	killed	them.
Potatoes	are	now	extinct	on	Mars.
So	are	earthworms	and	soil	bacteria.	I’ll	never	grow	another	plant	so long	I’m	here.
We	had	it	all	planned	out.	My	farm	would	give	me	food	till	Sol	900. A	supply	probe	would	get	here	on	Sol	856;	way	before	I	ran	out.	With	the farm	dead,	that	plan	is	history.
The	ration	packs	won’t	have	been	affected	by	the	explosion.	And	the potatoes	may	be	dead,	but	they’re	still	food.	I	was	just	about	to	harvest, so	it	was	a	good	time	for	this	to	happen,	I	guess.
The	rations	will	last	me	till	Sol	400.	I	can’t	say	for	sure	how	long	the potatoes	will	last	until	I	see	how	many	I	got.	But	I	can	estimate.	I	had	400 plants,	probably	averaging	5	potatoes	each:	2000	taters.	At	150	calories each,	I’ll	need	to	eat	10	per	sol	to	survive.	That	means	they’ll	last	me	200 sols.	Grand	total:	I	have	enough	food	to	last	till	Sol	600.
By	Sol	856	I’ll	be	long	dead.
Chapter	15

Project	Iris
		[08:12]WATNEY:	Test.
[08:25]JPL:	Received!	You	gave	us	quite	a	scare there.	Thanks	for	the	“A-OK”	message.	Our	analysis of	satellite	imagery	shows	a	complete	detachment of	Airlock	1.	Is	that	correct?	What’s	your	status?
Include	your	personal	health	and	Hab	equipment.
[08:39]WATNEY:	If	by	“detachment”	you	mean
“shot	me	out	like	a	cannon”	then	yeah.	Minor	cut on	my	forehead.	Had	some	issues	with	my	EVA	suit (I’ll	explain	later).	I	patched	up	the	Hab	and repressurized	it	(main	air	tanks	were	intact).	I just	got	power	back	online.	Primary	air	and	water tanks	were	unharmed.	The	rover,	solar	array,	and
Pathfinder	were	out	of	blast	range.	I’ll	run diagnostics	on	the	Hab’s	systems	while	I	wait	for your	next	reply.	By	the	way,	who	am	I	talking	to?
[08:52]JPL:	Venkat	Kapoor,	in	Houston.	Pasadena relays	my	messages.	I'm	going	to	handle	all	direct communication	with	you	from	now	on.	Check	the Oxygenator	and	Water	Reclaimer	first.	They’re	the most	important.
[09:05]WATNEY:	Duh.	Oxygenator	functioning perfectly.	Water	Reclaimer	is	completely	offline. Best	guess	is	water	froze	up	inside	and	burst	some tubing.	I’m	sure	I	can	fix	it.	Hab’s	main	computer also	functioning	without	any	problems.	Any	idea what	caused	the	Hab	to	blow	up?
[09:18]JPL:	Best	guess	is	fatigue	on	the	canvas near	Airlock	1.	The	pressurization	cycle	stressed it	until	it	failed.	From	now	on,	alternate	Airlock 2	and	3	for	all	EVAs.	Also,	we’ll	be	getting	you	a checklist	and	procedures	for	a	full	canvas	exam.
[09:31]WATNEY:	Yay,	I	get	to	stare	at	a	wall for	several	hours!	By	the	way,	the	farm	is	dead. I’ve	recovered	as	many	potatoes	as	I	could	and stored	them	outside.	I	count	1841.	That	will	last me	184	days.	Including	the	remaining	mission rations,	I’ll	start	starving	on	Sol	584.
[09:44]JPL:	Yeah,	we	figured.	Working	on	it.


“It’s	Sol	122,”	Bruce	said.	“We	have	until	Sol	584	to	get	a	probe	to
Mars.	That’s	462	sols,	which	is	475	days.”
The	assembled	department	heads	of	JPL	furrowed	their	brows	and rubbed	their	eyes.
“First	they	needed	a	presupply	way	ahead	of	schedule,”	Bruce continued.	“Now	they	need	it	even	more	ahead	of	schedule.”
He	stood	from	his	chair.	“The	positions	of	Earth	and	Mars	aren’t ideal.	The	trip	will	take	414	days.	Mounting	the	probe	to	the	booster	and dealing	with	inspections	will	take	13	days.	That	leaves	us	with	just	48 days	to	make	this	probe.”
Sounds	of	whispered	exasperation	filled	the	room.	“Jesus,”	someone said.
“It's	a	whole	new	ballgame,”	Bruce	continued.	“Our	focus	is	food. Anything	else	is	a	luxury.	We	don't	have	time	to	make	a	powered-descent lander.	It'll	have	to	be	a	tumbler.	So	we	can't	put	anything	delicate	inside.
Say	goodbye	to	the	all	the	other	crap	we'd	planned	to	send.”
“Where's	the	booster	coming	from?”asked	Norm	Toshi,	who	was	in charge	of	the	reentry	process.
“The	EagleEye	3	Saturn	probe,”	Bruce	said.	“It	was	scheduled	to launch	next	month.	NASA	put	it	on	hold	so	we	can	have	the	booster.” “I	bet	the	EagleEye	team	was	pissed	about	that,”	Norm	said.
“I'm	sure	they	were,”	Bruce	said.	“But	it's	the	only	booster	we	have that's	big	enough.	Which	brings	me	to	my	next	point:	We	only	get	one shot	at	this.	If	we	....	it	up,	Mark	Watney	dies.”
He	looked	around	the	room	and	let	that	sink	in.
“We	do	have	some	things	going	for	us,”	he	finally	said.	“We	have some	of	the	parts	built	for	the	Ares	4	presupply	missions.	We	can	steal from	them,	and	that'll	save	us	some	time.	Also,	we're	sending	food,	which is	pretty	robust.	Even	if	there's	a	reentry	problem	and	the	probe	impacts at	high	velocity,	food	is	still	food.
“And	we	don't	need	a	precision	landing.	Watney	can	travel	hundreds of	kilometers	if	necessary.	We	just	need	to	land	close	enough	for	him	to reach	it.	This	ends	up	being	a	standard	tumble-land	presupply.	All	we have	to	do	is	make	it	quickly.	So	let's	get	to	it.”
[08:02]JPL:	We've	spun	up	a	project	to	get	you food.	It's	been	in	progress	for	a	week	or	so.	We can	get	it	to	you	before	you	starve,	but	it'll	be tight.	It'll	just	be	food	and	a	radio.	We	can't send	an	Oxygenator,	Water	Reclaimer,	or	any	of that	other	stuff	without	powered	descent.
[08:16]WATNEY:	No	complaints	here!	You	get	me the	food,	I'll	be	a	happy	camper.	I've	got	all	Hab systems	up	and	running	again.	The	Water	Reclaimer is	working	fine	now	that	I	replaced	the	burst hoses.	As	for	water	supply,	I	have	620L	remaining. I	started	with	900L	(300	to	start	with,	600	more from	reducing	hydrazine).	So	I	lost	almost	300L	to sublimation.	Still,	with	the	Water	Reclaimer operational	again,	it's	plenty.
[08:31]JPL:	Good,	keep	us	posted	on	any mechanical	or	electronic	problems.	By	the	way,	the name	of	the	probe	we're	sending	is	“Iris”.	Named after	the	Greek	goddess	who	traveled	the	heavens with	the	speed	of	wind.	She's	also	the	goddess	of rainbows.
[08:47]WATNEY:	Gay	probe	coming	to	save	me.	Got it.


Rich	Purnell	sipped	coffee	in	the	silent	building.	Only	his	cubicle illuminated	the	otherwise	dark	room.	Continuing	with	his	computations, he	ran	a	final	test	on	the	software	he'd	written.	It	passed.
With	a	relieved	sigh,	he	sank	back	in	his	chair.	Checking	the	clock	on his	computer,	he	shook	his	head.	3:42am.
Being	an	astrodynamicist,	Rich	rarely	had	to	work	late.	His	job	was	to find	the	exact	orbits	and	course	corrections	needed	for	any	given	mission. Usually,	it	was	one	of	the	first	parts	of	a	project;	all	the	other	steps	being based	on	the	orbit.
But	this	time,	things	were	reversed.	Iris	needed	an	orbital	path,	and nobody	knew	when	it	would	launch.	A	non-Hoffman	Mars-transfer	isn't challenging,	but	it	does	require	the	exact	locations	of	Earth	and	Mars.
Planets	move	as	time	goes	by.	A	course	calculated	for	a	specific launch	date	will	work	only	for	that	date.	Even	a	single	day's	difference would	result	in	missing	Mars	entirely.
So	Rich	had	to	calculate	many	courses.	He	had	a	range	of	25	days during	which	Iris	might	launch.	He	calculated	one	course	for	each.
He	began	an	email	to	his	boss.
Mike,	he	typed,	Attached	are	the	courses	for	Iris,	in	1-day	increments. We	should	start	peer-review	and	vetting	so	they	can	be	officially accepted.	And	you	were	right,	I	was	here	almost	all	night.
It	wasn't	that	bad.	Nowhere	near	the	pain	of	calculating	orbits	for Hermes.	I	know	you	get	bored	when	I	go	in	to	the	math,	so	I'll	summarize: The	small,	constant	thrust	of	Hermes's	ion	drives	is	much	harder	to	deal with	than	the	large	point-thrusts	of	presupply	probes.
All	25	of	the	courses	take	414	days,	and	vary	only	slightly	in	thrust duration	and	angle.		The	fuel	requirement	is	nearly	identical	for	the orbits	and	is	well	within	the	capacity	of	EagleEye's	booster.
It's	too	bad.	Earth	and	Mars	are	really	badly	positioned.	Heck,	it's almost	easier	toHe	stopped	typing.
Furrowing	his	brow,	he	stared	in	to	the	distance.
“Hmm.”	he	said.
Grabbing	his	coffee	cup,	he	went	to	the	break	room	for	a	refill.
“I	know	you're	all	busy,”	Teddy	said,	“so	let's	make	this	fast.	I	need status	on	Project	Iris	from	all	departments.	Venkat,	let's	start	with	you.”
“The	mission	team's	ready,”	Venkat	said.	“There	was	a	minor	turf	war between	the	Ares-3	and	Ares-4	presupply	control	teams.	The	Ares-3	guys said	they	should	run	it,	cause	while	Watney's	on	Mars,	Ares-3	is	still	in progress.	The	Ares-4	team	points	out	it's	their	co-opted	probe	in	the	first place.	I	ended	up	going	with	Ares-3.”
“Did	that	upset	Ares-4?”	Teddy	asked.
“Yeah,	but	they'll	get	over	it.	They	have	13	presupply	missions coming	up.	They	won't	have	time	to	be	pissy.”
“Mitch,”	Teddy	said	to	the	flight	controller,	“What	about	the	launch?”
“We've	got	a	control	room	ready,”	Mitch	replied.	“I'll	oversee	the launch,	then	hand	cruise	and	landing	over	to	Venkat's	guys.” “Media?”	Teddy	said,	turning	to	Annie	Montrose.
“I'm	giving	daily	updates	to	the	press,”	she	said.	“Everyone	knows Watney's	....	if	this	doesn't	work.	The	public	hasn't	been	this	engaged in	ship	construction	since	Apollo	11.	CNN's	'The	Watney	Report'	has been	the	#1	show	in	its	time-slot	for	the	past	two	weeks.”
“The	attention	is	good,”	Teddy	said.	“It'll	help	get	us	emergency funding	from	Congress.	Maurice,	how's	the	booster?”
“It's	all	right	for	now,”	said	Maurice	Stein,	Director	of	Pad Operations.	“But	it's	not	ideal.	EagleEye	3	was	set	to	launch.	Boosters aren't	designed	to	stand	upright	and	bear	the	stress	of	gravity	for	long periods.	We're	adding	external	supports	that	we'll	remove	before	launch. It's	easier	than	disassembly.	Also	the	fuel	is	corrosive	to	the	internal tanks,	so	we	had	to	drain	it.	In	the	mean	time,	we're	performing inspections	on	all	systems	every	three	days.”
“Good,	good,”	Teddy	nodded.	“Now	for	the	big	question:	Bruce?
How's	Iris	coming	along?”
“We're	behind,”	Bruce	said	with	a	tired	shake	of	his	head.	“We're going	as	fast	as	we	can,	but	it's	just	not	fast	enough.” “I	can	find	money	for	overtime,”	Teddy	offered.
“We're	already	working	around	the	clock.”
“How	far	behind	are	we	walking	about?”	Teddy	asked.
“We've	been	at	it	29	days;	so	we	only	have	19	left,”	Bruce	explained. “After	that,	the	Pad		needs	13	days	to	mount	it	on	the	booster.	We're	at least	two	weeks	behind.”
“Is	that	as	far	behind	as	you're	going	to	get?”	Teddy	asked.	“Or	will you	slip	more?”
Bruce	shrugged.	“If	we	don't	have	any	more	problems,	it'll	be	two weeks	late.	But	we	always	have	problems.” “Give	me	a	number,”	Teddy	said.
“15	days,”	Bruce	responded.	“If	I	had	another	15	days,	I'm	sure	we could	get	it	done	in	time.”
“All	right,”	Teddy	said.	“Let's	create	15	days.”
Turning	his	attention	to	the	Ares-3	Flight	Surgeon,	Teddy	asked	“Dr. Keller,	can	we	reduce	Watney's	food	intake	to	make	the	rations	last longer?”
“Sorry,	but	no,”	Keller	said.	“he's	already	at	a	minimal	calorie	count. In	fact,	considering	the	amount	of	physical	labor	he	does,	he's	eating	far less	than	he	should.	And	it's	only	going	to	get	worse.	Soon	his	entire	diet will	be	potatoes	and	vitamin	supplements.	He's	been	saving	protein-rich rations	for	later	use,	but	he'll	still	be	malnourished.”
“Once	he	runs	out	of	food,	how	long	until	he	starves	to	death?”	Teddy asked.
“Presuming	an	ample	water	supply,	he	might	last	three	weeks.	Shorter than	a	typical	hunger	strike	but	remember	he'll	be	malnourished	and	thin to	begin	with.”
“Remember,”	Venkat	interjected,	“Iris	is	a	tumbler;	he	might	have	to drive	a	few	days	to	get	it.	And	I'm	guessing	it's	hard	to	control	a	rover when	you're	literally	starving	to	death.”
“He's	right,”	Dr.	Keller	confirmed.	“Within	4	days	of	running	out	of food,	he'll	barely	be	able	to	stand	up,	let	alone	control	a	rover.	Plus,	his mental	faculties	will	rapidly	decline.	He'd	have	a	hard	time	even	staying awake.”
“So	the	landing	date's	firm,”	Teddy	said.	“Maurice,	can	you	get	it	on the	booster	in	less	than	13	days?”
Maurice	pondered.	“Well...	It	only	takes	3	days	to	actually	mount	it.
The	following	10	are	for	testing	and	inspections.”
“How	much	can	you	reduce	those?”
“With	enough	overtime,	I	could	get	the	mounting	down	to	2	days. That	includes	transport	from	Pasadena	to	Cape	Canaveral.	But	the inspections	can't	be	shortened.	They're	time-based.	We	do	checks	and	rechecks	with	set	intervals	between	them	to	see	if	something	deforms	or warps.	If	you	shorten	the	intervals,	you	invalidate	the	inspections.” “How	often	do	those	inspections	reveal	a	problem?”	Teddy	asked.
A	silence	fell	over	the	room.
“Uh,”	Maurice	stammered.	“Are	you	suggesting	we	don't	do	the inspections?”
“No,”	said	Teddy.	“Right	now	I'm	asking	how	often	they	reveal	a problem.”
“About	one	in	twenty	launches.”
“And	how	often	is	the	problem	they	reveal	a	would-be	missionfailure?”
“I'm,	uh,	not	sure.	Maybe	half	the	time?”
“So	if	we	skip	the	inspections	and	testing,	we	have	a	1	in	40	chance	of mission	failure?”	Teddy	asked.
“That's	2.5%,”	Venkat	said,	steeping	in.	“Normally,	that's	grounds	for a	countdown	halt.	We	can't	take	a	chance	like	that.”
“	'Normally'	was	a	long	time	ago,”	Teddy	said	calmly.	“97.5%	is better	than	zero.	Can	anyone	think	of	a	safer	way	to	get	more	time?” He	looked	around	the	table.	Blank	faces	stared	back.
“All	right,	then.	Speeding	up	the	mounting	process	and	skipping inspections	buys	us	11	days.	If	Bruce	can	pull	a	rabbit	out	of	a	hat	and	get done	sooner,	Maurice	can	do	some	inspections.”
“What	about	the	other	4	days?”	Venkat	asked,	still	frowning	at skipping	inspections.
“I'm	sure	Watney	can	stretch	the	food	to	last	4	extra	days, malnutrition	notwithstanding,”	Teddy	said,	looking	to	Dr.	Keller.
“I-”	Keller	started.	“I	can't	recommend-”
“Folks,”	Teddy	interrupted.	“I	understand	your	positions.	We	have procedures.	Skipping	those	procedures	means	risk.	Risk	means	trouble for	your	department.	But	now	isn't	the	time	to	cover	our	asses.	We	have to	take	risks	or	Mark	Watney	dies.”
Turning	to	Keller,	he	said	“Make	the	food	last	another	4	days.” Keller	nodded	silently.


“Rich,”	said	Mike.
Rich	Purnell	concentrated	on	his	computer	screen.	His	cubicle	was	a landfill	of	printouts,	charts,	and	reference	books.	Empty	coffee	cups rested	on	every	surface;	take-out	packaging	littered	the	ground.
“Rich,”	Mike	said,	more	forcefully.
Rich	looked	up.	“Yeah?”
“What	the	hell	are	you	doing?”
“Just	a	little	side	project.	Something	I	wanted	to	check	up	on.”
“Well...	that's	fine,	I	guess,”	Mike	said,	“but	you	need	to	do	your assigned	work	first.	I	asked	for	those	satellite	adjustments	two	weeks	ago and	you	still	haven't	done	them.”
“I	need	some	supercomputer	time.”	Rich	said.
“You	need	supercomputer	time	to	calculate	routine	satellite adjustments?”
“No,	it's	for	this	other	thing	I'm	working	on,”	Rich	said.
“Rich,	seriously.	You	have	to	do	your	job.”
Rich	thought	for	a	moment.	“Would	now	be	a	good	time	for	a vacation?”	He	asked.
Mike	sighed.	“You	know	what,	Rich?	I	think	now	would	be	an	ideal
time	for	you	to	take	a	vacation.”
“Great!”	Rich	smiled.	“I'll	start	right	now.”
“Sure,”	Mike	said.	“Go	on	home.	Get	some	rest.”
“Oh,	I'm	not	going	home,”	said	Rich,	returning	to	his	calculations. Mike	rubbed	his	eyes.	“Ok,	whatever.	About	those	satellite	orbits...?” “I'm	on	vacation,”	Rich	said	without	looking	up.
Mike	shrugged	and	walked	away.


[08:01]WATNEY:	How's	my	care	package	coming along?
[08:16]JPL:	A	little	behind	schedule,	but	we'll get	it	done.	In	the	mean	time,	we	want	you	to	get back	to	work.	We're	satisfied	the	Hab's	is	in	good condition.	Maintenance	only	takes	you	12	hours	per week.	We're	going	to	pack	the	rest	of	your	time with	research	and	experiments.
[08:31]WATNEY:	Great!	I'm	sick	of	sitting	on	my ass.	I'm	going	to	be	here	for	years.	You	may	as well	make	use	of	me.
[08:47]JPL:	That's	what	we're	thinking.	We'll get	you	a	schedule	as	soon	as	the	science	team puts	it	together.	It'll	be	mostly	of	EVAs, geological	samples,	soil	tests,	and	weekly	selfadministered	medical	tests.	Honestly,	this	is	the best	“bonus	Mars	time”	we've	had	since	the
Opportunity	lander.
[09:02]WATNEY:	Opportunity	never	went	back	to Earth.
[09:17]JPL:	Sorry.	Bad	analogy.


The	Whiteroom	was	abuzz	with	activity	as	technicians	sealed	Iris	in to	the	specially-designed	shipping	container.
The	other	two	shifts	watched	from	the	observation	deck.	They	had rarely	seen	their	own	homes	in	two	months;	a	makeshift	bunkroom	had been	set	up	in	the	cafeteria.	Fully	a	third	of	them	would	normally	be asleep	at	this	hour,	but	they	did	not	want	to	miss	this	moment.
The	shift	leader	tightened	the	final	bolt.	As	he	retracted	the	wrench, the	engineers	broke	in	to	applause.	Many	of	them	were	in	tears. After	62	days	of	grueling	work,	Iris	was	complete.


“The	launch	preparations	are	complete,”	Annie	Montrose	said	to	the press	room.	“Iris	is	ready	to	go.	The	scheduled	launch	is	9:14am.
“Once	launched,	it	will	stay	in	orbit	for	at	least	three	hours.	During that	time,	mission	control	will	gather	exact	telemetry	in	preparation	for the	trans-Mars	injection	burn.	Once	that's	complete	the	mission	will	be handed	off	to	the	Ares-3	presupply	team,	who	will	monitor	its	progress over	the	following	months.	It	will	take	414	days	to	reach	Mars.	”
“About	the	payload,”	a	reporter	asked,	“I	hear	there's	more	than	just food?”
“That's	true,”Annie	smiled.	“We	allocated	100	grams	for	luxury items.	There	are	some	handwritten	letters	from	Mark's	family,	a	note from	the	President,	and	a	USB	drive	filled	with	music	from	all	ages.” “Any	disco?”	someone	asked.
“No	disco,”	Annie	said,	as	chuckles	cascaded	through	the	room.
CNN's	Cathy	Warner	spoke	up	“If	this	launch	fails,	is	there	any recourse	for	Watney?”
“There	are	risks	to	any	launch,”	Annie	said,	“but	we	don't	anticipate problems.	The	weather	at	the	Cape	is	clear	with	warm	temperatures.
Conditions	couldn't	be	better.”
“Is	there	any	spending	limit	to	this	rescue	operation?”	another reporter	asked.	“Some	people	are	beginning	to	ask	how	much	is	too much.”
“It's	not	about	the	bottom	line,”	Annie	said,	prepared	for	the	question. “It's	about	a	human	life	in	immediate	danger.	But	if	you	want	to	look	at	it financially,	consider	the	value	of	Mark	Watney's	extended	mission.	His prolonged	mission	and	fight	for	survival	is	giving	us	more	knowledge about	Mars	than	the	rest	of	the	Ares	program	combined.”


“Do	you	believe	in	God,	Venkat?”	Mitch	asked.
“Sure,	lots	of	'em,”	Venkat	said.	“I'm	Hindu.”
“Ask	'em	all	for	help	with	this	launch.”
“Will	do.”
Mitch	stepped	forward	to	his	station	in	the	large	control	room.	He glanced	at	the	many	screens	on	the	far	wall,	and	the	dozens	of	people	at their	stations.
He	put	his	headset	on	and	said.	“This	is	the	Flight	Director.	Begin
Launch	Status	Check.”
“Roger	that,	Houston,”	came	the	reply	from	the	Launch	Control Director	in	Florida.	“CLCDR	checking	all	stations	are	manned	and systems	ready,”	he	broadcast,	“Give	me	a	go/no-go	for	launch.	Talker?” “Go.”	came	the	response.
“Timer.”
“Go,”	Came	another	voice.
“QAM1.”
“Go.”
Resting	his	chin	on	his	hands,	Mitch	stared	at	the	center	screen.	It showed	the	Pad	video	feed.	The	booster,	amid	cloudy	water	vapor	from the	cooling	process,	still	had	EagleEye3	stenciled	on	the	side.
“QAM2.”
“Go.”
“QAM3.”
“Go.”
Venkat	leaned	against	the	back	wall.	An	administrator,	his	job	was done.	He	could	only	watch	and	hope.	His	gaze	fixated	on	the	far	wall's displays.	In	his	mind	he	saw	the	numbers,	the	shift	juggling,	the	outright lies	and	borderline	crimes	he'd	committed	to	put	this	mission	together.	It would	all	be	worthwhile	if	it	worked. “FSC.”
“Go.”
“Prop	1.”
“Go.”
Teddy	sat	in	the	VIP	observation	room	behind	mission	control.	His authority	afforded	him	the	very	best	seat:	front-row	center.	His	briefcase lay	at	his	feet	and	he	held	a	blue	folder	in	his	hands.
“Prop	2.”
“Go.”
“PTO.”
“Go.”
Annie	Montrose	paced	in	her	private	office	next	to	the	press	room. Nine	televisions	mounted	to	the	wall	were	each	tuned	to	a	different network;	each	network	showed	the	launch	pad.	A	glance	at	her	computer showed	foreign	networks	doing	the	same.	The	world	was	holding	its breath.
“ACC.”
“Go.”
“LWO.”
“Go.”
Bruce	Ng	sat	in	the	JPL	cafeteria	along	with	hundreds	of	engineers who	had	given	everything	they	had	to	Iris.	They	watched	the	large	TV with	rapt	attention.	It	was	6:13am	in	Pasadena,	yet	every	single	employee was	present.
“AFLC.”
“Go.”
“Guidance.”
“Go.”
Millions	of	kilometers	away,	the	crew	of	Hermes	listened	as	they crowded	around	Johanssen's	station.	The	2-minute	transmission	time didn't	matter.	They	had	no	way	to	help;	there	was	no	need	to	interact. Johanssen	stared	intently	at	her	screen,	which	displayed	only	the	audio signal	strength.	Beck	wrung	his	hands.	Vogel	stood	motionless,	his	eyes fixed	on	the	floor.	Martinez	prayed	silently	at	first,	then	saw	no	reason	to hide	it.	Commander	Lewis	stood	apart,	her	arms	folded	across	her	chest. “PTC.”
“Go.”
“Launch	Vehicle	Director.”
“Go.”
“Houston,	this	is	Launch	Control,	we	are	go	for	launch.”
“Roger,”	Mitch	said	checking	the	countdown.	“This	is	Flight,	we	are go	for	launch	on	schedule.”
“Roger	that	Houston,”	Launch	Control	said,	“Launch	on	schedule.”
Once	the	clock	reached	-00:00:15,	the	television	networks	got	what they	were	waiting	for.	The	Timer	Controller	began	the	verbal	countdown.
“15,”	She	said.	“14...	13...	12...	11...”
Thousands	had	gathered	at	Cape	Canaveral;	the	largest	crowd	ever	to watch	an	unmanned	launch.	They	listened	to	the	Timer	Controller's	voice as	it	echoed	across	the	grandstands.
“10...	9...	8...	7...”
Rich	Purnell,	entrenched	in	his	orbital	calculations,	had	lost	track	of time.	He	didn't	notice	when	his	coworkers	migrated	to	the	large	meeting room	where	a	TV	had	been	set	up.	In	the	back	of	his	mind,	he	thought	the office	was	unusually	quiet,	but	he	gave	it	no	further	thought.
“6...	5...	4...”
“Ignition	sequence	start.”
“3...	2...	1...”
Clamps	released;	the	booster	rose	amid	a	plume	of	smoke	and	fire, slowly	at	first,	then	racing	ever	faster.	The	assembled	crowd	cheered	it	on its	way.
“...and	liftoff	of	the	Iris	Supply	Probe,”	the	Timer	Controller	said.
As	the	booster	soared,	Mitch	had	no	time	to	watch	the	spectacle	on the	main	screen.	“Trim?”	He	called	out.
“Trim's	good,	Flight.”	came	the	immediate	response.
“Course?”	He	asked.
“On	course.”
“Altitude	1000	meters,”	someone	said.
“We've	reached	safe-abort,”	another	person	called	out,	indicating	that the	ship	could		crash	harmlessly	into	the	Atlantic	Ocean	if	necessary. “Altitude	1500	meters.”
“Pitch	and	roll	maneuver	commencing.”
“Getting	a	little	shimmy,	flight.”
Mitch	looked	over	to	the	Ascent	Flight	Director.	“Say	again?” “A	slight	shimmy.	On-board	guidance	is	handling	it.” “Keep	an	eye	on	it,”	Mitch	said.
“Altitude	2500	meters.”
“Pitch	and	roll	complete,	22	seconds	till	staging.”

The	quick	yet	thorough	design	of	Iris	accounted	for	catastrophic landing	failure.	Rather	than	normal	meal	kits,	most	of	the	food	was	cubed protein	bar	material.	Even	if	Iris	failed	to	deploy	its	tumble	balloons	and impacted	at	hundreds	of	kph,	the	protein	cubes	would	still	be	edible.
An	unmanned	mission,	there	was	no	cap	on	acceleration.	The	contents of	the	probe	endured	forces	no	human	could	survive.	While	NASA	had tested	the	effects	of	extreme	G-forces	on	protein	cubes,	they	had	not	done so	with	a	simultaneous	lateral	vibration.	Had	they	been	given	more	time, they	would	have.
The	harmless	shimmy,	caused	by	a	minor	fuel	mixture	imbalance, rattled	the	payload.	Mounted	by	strong	bolts,	Iris	held	firm.	The	protein cubes	inside	did	not.
The	thrust	compressed	the	food	while	the	shimmy	rattled	it.	An	effect similar	to	liquefaction	during	an	earthquake	transformed	the	protein cubes	into	a	thick	sludge.	Stored	in	a	compartment	that	originally	had	no left-over	space,	the	now-compressed	substance	had	room	to	slosh.
The	shimmy	also	caused	an	imbalanced	load,	forcing	the	sludge toward	the	edge	of	its	compartment.	The	shift	in	weight	only	aggravated the	problem	and	the	shimmy	grew	stronger.

“Shimmy's	getting	violent,”	reported	the	Ascent	Flight	Director.
“How	violent?”	Mitch	said.
“More	than	we	like,”	he	said.	“But	the	accelerometers	caught	it	and calculated	the	new	center	of	mass.	The	guidance	computer	is	adjusting
the	engines'	thrusts	to	counteract.	We're	still	good.”
“Keep	me	posted,”	Mitch	said.
“13	seconds	till	staging.”

The	unexpected	weight	shift	had	not	spelled	disaster.	All	systems were	designed	for	worst-case	scenarios;	each	did	their	job	admirably.	The ship	continued	toward	orbit	with	only	a	minor	course	adjustment, implemented	automatically	by	sophisticated	software.
The	first	stage	depleted	its	fuel,	and	the	booster	coasted	for	a	fraction of	a	second	as	it	jettisoned	stage-clamps	via	explosive	bolts.	The	nowempty	stage	fell	away	from	the	craft	as	the	second-stage	engines	prepared to	ignite.
The	brutal	forces	had	disappeared.	The	protein	sludge	floated	free	in the	container.	Given	two	seconds,	it	would	have	re-expanded	and solidified.	But	it	was	given	only	a	quarter-second.
As	the	second	stage	fired,	the	craft	experienced	a	sudden	jolt	of immense	force.	No	longer	contending	with	the	dead-weight	of	the	first stage,	the	acceleration	was	profound.	The	300kg	of	sludge	slammed	in	to the	back	of	its	container.	The	point	of	impact	was	at	the	edge	of	Iris, nowhere	near	where	the	mass	was	expected	to	be.
Though	Iris	was	held	in	place	by	five	large	bolts,	the	force	was directed	entirely	to	a	single	one.	The	bolt	was	designed	to	withstand immense	forces;	if	necessary	to	carry	the	entire	weight	of	the	payload. But	it	was	not	designed	to	sustain	a	sudden	impact	from	a	loose	300kg mass.
The	bolt	sheared.	The	burden	was	then	shifted	to	the	remaining	four bolts.	The	forceful	impact	having	passed,	their	work	was	considerably easier	than	that	of	their	fallen	comrade.
Had	the	pad	crew	been	given	time	to	do	normal	inspections,	they would	have	noticed	the	minor	defect	in	one	of	the	bolts.	A	defect	that slightly	weakened	it,	though	would	not	cause	failure	on	a	normal	mission.
Still,	they	would	have	swapped	it	out	with	a	perfect	replacement.
The	off-center	load	presented	unequal	force	to	the	four	remaining bolts,	the	defective	one	bearing	the	brunt	of	it.	Soon,	it	failed	as	well.
From	there,	the	other	three	failed	in	rapid	succession.
Iris	slipped	from	its	supports	in	the	payload	bulb,	slamming	in	to	the hull.

“Woah!”	exclaimed	the		Ascent	Flight	Director.	“Flight,	we're	getting a	large	precession!”
“What?”	Mitch	said	as	alerts	beeped	and	lights	flashed	across	all	the consoles.
“Force	on	Iris	is	at	7	G's,”	someone	said.
“Intermittent	signal	loss,”	came	another	voice.
“Ascent,	What's	happening	here?”	Mitch	demanded.
“All	hell	broke	loose.	It's	spinning	on	the	long	axis	with	a	17	degree precession.”
“How	bad?”
“At	least	5	rps,	and	falling	off	course.”
“Can	you	get	it	to	orbit?”
“I	can't	talk	to	it	at	all;	signal	failures	left	and	right.”
“Comm!”	Mitch	shot	to	the	Communications	Director.
“Workin'	on	it,	Flight,”	came	the	response.	“There's	a	problem	with the	onboard	system.”
“Getting	some	major	G's	inside,	Flight.”
“Ground	telemetry	shows	it	200	meters	low	of	target	path.”
“We've	lost	readings	on	the	probe,	Flight.”
Mitch	zeroed	in	on	that	last	comment.	“Entirely	lost	the	probe?” Mitch	asked.
“Affirm,	Flight.	Intermittent	signal	from	the	ship,	but	no	probe.”
“Shit,”	Mitch	said.	“It	shook	loose	in	the	bay.”
“It's	dradeling,	Flight.”
“Can	it	limp	to	orbit?”	Mitch	said.	“Even	super-low	EO?	We	might	be able	to-”
“Loss	of	signal,	Flight.”
“LOS	here,	too.”
“Same	here.”
Other	than	the	alarms,	the	room	fell	silent.
After	a	moment,	Mitch	said	“Reestablish?”
“No	luck,”	said	Comm.
“Ground?”	Mitch	asked.
“GC,”	same	the	reply,	“Vehicle	had	already	left	visual	range.” “SatCon?”	Mitch	asked.
“No	satellite	acquisition	of	signal.”
Mitch	looked	forward	to	the	main	screen.	It	was	black	now,	with	large white	letters	reading	“LOS”.
“Flight,”	came	a	voice	over	the	radio,	“US	Destroyer	Stockton	reports debris	falling	from	the	sky.	Source	matches	last	known	location	of	Iris.” Mitch	put	his	head	in	his	hands.	“Roger,”	he	said.
Then	he	uttered	the	words	every	Flight	Director	hopes	never	to	say:
“GC,	Flight.	Lock	the	doors.”
It	was	the	signal	to	start	post-failure	procedures.
From	the	VIP	observation	room,	Teddy	watched	the	despondent Mission	Control	Center.	He	took	a	deep	breath,	then	let	it	out.	He	looked forlornly	at	the	blue	folder,	which	contained	the	cheerful	speech	praising a	perfect	launch.	Placing	it	in	his	briefcase,	he	then	extracted	the	red folder	with	the	other	speech	in	it.


Venkat	sat	in	his	darkened	office.	He	never	decided	to	be	in	the	dark.
He'd	just	been	lost	in	thought	so	long	it	got	dark	around	him.
His	mobile	rang.	His	wife	again.	No	doubt	worried	about	him.	He	let it	go	to	voice	mail.	He	just	couldn't	face	her.	Or	anyone.
A	brief	chime	came	from	his	computer.	Glancing	over,	he	saw	an email	from	JPL.	A	relayed	message	from	Pathfinder:

[16:03]WATNEY:	How'd	the	launch	go?




Chapter	16

Martinez:
Dr.	Shields	says	I	need	to	write	personal messages	to	each	of	the	crew.	She	says	it'll	keep me	tethered	to	humanity.	I	think	it's	bullshit. But	hey,	it's	an	order.
With	you,	I	can	be	blunt:
If	I	die,	I	need	you	to	check	on	my	parents.
They'll	want	to	hear	about	our	time	on	Mars	firsthand.	I'll	need	you	to	do	that.
It	won't	be	easy	talking	to	a	couple	about their	dead	son.	It's	a	lot	to	ask;	that's	why	I'm asking	you.	I'd	tell	you	you're	my	best	friend	and stuff,	but	it	would	be	gay.
I'm	not	giving	up.	Just	planning	for	every outcome.	It's	what	I	do.


Guo	Ming,	Director	of	the	China	National	Space	Administration, examined	the	expansive	paperwork	at	his	desk.	In	the	old	days,	when China	wanted	to	launch	a	rocket,	they	just	launched	it.	Now,	they	were compelled	by	international	agreements	to	warn	other	nations	first.
It	was	a	requirement,	Guo	Ming	noted	to	himself,	that	did	not	apply	to the	United	States.	To	be	fair,	the	Americans	publicly	announced	their launch	schedules	well	in	advance,	so	it	amounted	to	the	same.
He	walked	a	fine	line	filling	out	the	form:	Making	the	launch	date	and flight	path	clear,	while	doing	everything	possible	to	“conceal	state secrets.”
He	snorted	at	the	last	requirement.	“Ridiculous,”	he	mumbled.	The Taiyang	Shen	had	no	strategic	or	military	value.	It	was	an	unmanned probe	that	would	be	in	Earth	orbit	less	than	two	days.	After	that,	it	would travel	to	a	solar	orbit	between	Mercury	and	Venus.	It	would	be	China's first	heliology	probe	to	orbit	the	sun.
		Yet,	the	State	Council	insisted	all	launches	be	shrouded	in	secrecy. Even	launches	with	nothing	to	hide.	This	way,	other	nations	could	not infer	from	lack	of	openness	which	launches	contained	classified payloads.
A	knock	at	the	door	interrupted	his	paperwork.
“Come,”	Guo	Ming	said,	happy	for	the	interruption.
“Good	evening,	Sir,”	said	Under-Director	Zhu	Tao.
“Tao,	welcome	back.”
“Thank	you,	Sir.	It's	good	to	be	back	in	Beijing.”
“How	were	things	at	Jiuquan?”	asked		Guo	Ming.	“Not	too	cold,	I hope?	I'll	never	understand	why	our	launch	complex	is	in	the	middle	of the	Gobi	Desert.”
“It	was	cold,	yet	manageable,”	Zhu	Tao	said.
“And	how	are	launch	preparations	coming	along?” “I	am	happy	to	report	they	are	all	on-schedule.” “Excellent,”	Guo	Ming	smiled.
Zhu	Tao	sat	quietly,	staring	at	his	boss.
Guo	Ming	looked	expectantly	back	at	him,	but	Zhu	Tao	neither	stood to	leave	nor	said	anything	further.
“Something	else,	Tao?”	Guo	Ming	asked.
“Mmm,”	Zhu	Tao	said,	“Of	course,	you've	heard	about	the	Iris probe?”
“Yes,	I	did,”	Guo	frowned.	“Terrible	situation.	That	poor	man's	going to	starve.”
“Possibly,”	Zhu	Tao	said.	“Possibly	not.”
Guo	Ming	leaned	back	in	his	chair.	“What	are	you	saying?”
“It's	the	Taiyang	Shen's	booster,	Sir.	Our	engineers	have	run	the numbers,	and	it	has	enough	fuel	for	a	Mars	injection	orbit.	It	could	get there	in	419	days.”
“Are	you	kidding?”
“Have	you	ever	known	me	to	'kid,'	Sir?”
Guo	Ming	stood	and	pinched	his	chin.	Pacing,	he	said	“We	can	really send	a	probe	to	Mars?”
“It's	hardly	notable,	Sir,”	Zhu	Tao	said.	“We've	sent	several	in	the past.”
“Yes,	I	know,	but	we	could	really	send	the	Taiyang	Shen?”
“No,	Sir,”	said	Zhu	Tao.	“It's	far	too	heavy.	The	massive	heat shielding	makes	it	the	heaviest	unmanned	probe	we've	ever	built.	That's why	the	booster	had	to	be	so	powerful.	But	a	lighter	payload	could	be	sent all	the	way	to	Mars.”
“How	much	mass	could	we	send?”	Guo	Ming	asked.
“941	kilograms,	Sir.”
“Hmm,”	Guo	Ming	said,	“I	bet	NASA	could	work	with	that limitation.	Why	haven't	they	approached	us?”
“Because	they	don't	know.”	Zhu	Tao	said.	“All	our	booster	technology is	classified	information.	The	Ministry	of	State	Security	even	spreads disinformation	about	our	capabilities.	This	is	for	obvious	reasons.”
“So	they	don't	know	we	can	help	them,”	Guo	Ming	said,	“If	we	decide not	to	help,	no	one	will	know	we	could	have.”
“Correct,	Sir.”
“For	the	sake	of	argument,	let's	say	we	decided	to	help.	What	then?”
“Time	would	be	the	enemy,	Sir,”	Zhu	Tao	answered.	“Based	on	travel duration	and	the	supplies	their	astronaut	has	remaining,	any	such	probe would	have	to	be	launched	within	a	month.	Even	then	he	would	starve	a little.”
“That's	right	around	when	we	planned	to	launch	Taiyang	Shen.”
“Yes,	Sir.	But	it	took	them	two	months	to	build	Iris,	and	it	was	so rushed	it	failed.”
“That's	their	problem,”	Guo	Ming	said.	“Our	end	would	be	providing the	booster.	We'd	launch	from	Jiuquan;	we	can't	ship	an	800-ton	rocket	to Florida.”
“Any	agreement	would	hinge	on	the	Americans	reimbursing	us	for	the booster,”	Zhu	Tao	said,	“and	the	State	Council	would	likely	want	political favors	from	the	US	Government.”
“Reimbursement	would	be	pointless,”	Guo	Ming	said.	“This	was	an expensive	project,	and	the	State	Council	grumbled	about	it	all	along.	If they	had	a	bulk	payout	for	it's	value,	they'd	just	keep	it.	We'd	never	get	to build	another	one.”
He	clasped	his	hands	behind	his	back.	“And	the	American	people	may be	sentimental,	but	their	government	is	not.	The	US	State	Department won't	trade	anything	major	for	one	man's	life.” “So	it's	hopeless?”	asked	Zhu	Tao.
“Not	hopeless,”	Guo	Ming	corrected.	“Just	hard.	If	this	becomes	a negotiation	by	diplomats,	it	will	never	resolve.	We	need	to	keep	this among	scientists.	Space	agency	to	space	agency.	I'll	get	a	translator	and call	NASA's	Director.	We'll	work	out	an	agreement,	then	present	it	to	our governments	as	a	fait	accompli.”
“But	what	can	they	do	for	us?”	Zhu	Tao	asked.	“We'd	be	giving	up	a booster	and		effectively	canceling	Taiyang	Shen.”
Guo	Ming	smiled.	“They'll	give	us	something	we	can't	get	without them.”
“And	that	is?”
“They'll	put	a	Chinese	astronaut	on	Mars.”
Zhu	Tao	stood.	“Of	course,”	he	smiled.	“The	Ares	5	crew	hasn't	even been	selected	yet.	We'll	insist	on	a	crewman.	One	we	get	to	pick	and train.	NASA	and	the	US	State	Department	would	surely	accept	that.	But will	our	State	Council?”
Guo	Ming	smiled	wryly.	“Publicly	rescue	the	Americans?	Put	a Chinese	astronaut	on	Mars?	Have	the	world	see	China	as	equal	to	the	US in	space?	The	State	Council	would	sell	their	own	mothers	for	that.”


Teddy	listened	to	the	phone	at	his	ear.	The	voice	on	the	other	end finished	what	it	had	to	say,	then	fell	silent	as	it	awaited	an	answer.
He	stared	at	nothing	in	particular	as	he	processed	what	he'd	just	heard. After	a	few	seconds,	he	replied	“Yes.”
		Johanssen:
Your	poster	outsold	the	rest	of	ours	combined.
You're	a	hot	chick	who	went	to	Mars.	You're	on dorm-room	walls	all	over	the	world.
Looking	like	that,	why	are	you	such	a	nerd?	And you	are,	you	know.	A	serious	nerd.	I	had	to	do some	computer	shit	to	get	Pathfinder	talking	to the	rover	and	oh	my	God.	And	I	had	NASA	telling	me what	to	do	every	step	of	the	way.
You	should	try	to	be	more	cool.	Wear	dark glasses	and	a	leather	jacket.	Carry	a	switchblade.
Aspire	to	a	level	of	coolness	known	only	as...
“Botanist	Cool.”
Did	you	know	Commander	Lewis	had	a	chat	with	us men?	If	anyone	hit	on	you,	we'd	be	off	the mission.	I	guess	after	a	lifetime	of	commanding sailors	she's	got	an	unfairly	jaded	view.
Anyway.	Try	not	to	think	about	all	those	guys wanking	to	your	poster.


“Ok,	here	we	are	again,”	said	Bruce	to	the	assembled	heads	of	JPL. “You've	all	heard	about	the	Taiyang	Shen,	so	you	know	our	friends	in China	have	given	us	one	more	chance.	But	this	time,	it's	going	to	be harder.
“Taiyang	Shen	will	be	ready	to	launch	in	28	days.	If	it	launches	on time,	our	payload	will	get	to	Mars	on	Sol	624,	six	weeks	after	Watney's expected	to	run	out	of	food.	NASA's	already	working	on	ways	to	stretch his	supply.
“We	made	history	when	we	finished	Iris	in	sixty	three	days.	Now	we have	to	do	it	in	twenty	eight.”
He	looked	across	the	table	to	the	incredulous	faces.
“Folks,”	he	said,	“This	is	going	to	be	the	most	'ghetto'	spacecraft	ever built.	There's	only	one	way	to	finish	that	fast:	No	landing	system.” “Sorry,	what?”	Jack	Trevor	stammered.
Bruce	nodded.	“You	heard	me.	No	landing	system.	We'll	need
guidance	for	in-flight	course	adjustments.	But	once	it	gets	to	Mars,	it's going	to	crash.”
“That's	crazy!”	Jack	said.	“It'll	be	going	an	insane	velocity	when	it hits!”
“Yep,”	Bruce	said.	“With	ideal	atmospheric	drag,	it'll	impact	at	300 meters	per	second.”
“What	good	will	a	pulverized	probe	do	Watney?”	Jack	asked.
“As	long	as	the	food	doesn't	burn	up	on	the	way	in,	Watney	can	eat it.”	Bruce	commented.
Turning	to	the	whiteboard,	he	began	drawing	a	basic	organizational chart.	“I	want	two	teams,”	He	began.
“Team	One	will	make	the	outer	shell,	guidance	system,	and	thrusters. All	we	need	is	for	it	to	get	to	Mars.	I	want	the	safest	possible	system. Aerosol	propellant	would	be	best.	High-gain	radio	so	we	can	talk	to	it, and	standard	satellite	navigational	software.
“Team	Two	will	deal	with	the	payload.	They	need	to	find	a	way	to contain	the	food	during	impact.	If	protein	bars	hit	sand	at	300m/s,	they'll make	protein-scented	sand.	We	need	them	edible	after	impact.
“We	can	weigh	941kg.	At	least	300	of	that	needs	to	be	food.	Get crackin'.”


“Uh,	Dr.	Kapoor?”	Rich	said,	peeking	his	head	in	to	Venkat's	office.
“Do	you	have	a	minute?”
Venkat	gestured	him	in.	“You	are...?”
“Rich,	Rich	Purnell,”	he	said,	shuffling	in	to	the	office,	his	arms wrapped	around	a	sheaf	disorganized	papers.	“From	astrodynamics.”
“Nice	to	meet	you,”	Venkat	said.	“What	can	I	do	for	you,	Rich?”
“I	came	up	with	something	a	while	ago.	Spent	a	lot	of	time	on	it.”	He dumped	the	papers	on	Venkat's	desk.	“Lemme	find	the	summary...”
Venkat	stared	forlornly	at	his	once	clean	desk,	now	strewn	with	scores of	printouts.
“Here	we	go!”	Rich	said	triumphantly,	grabbing	a	paper.	Then,	his expression	saddened.	“No,	this	isn't	it.”
“Rich,”	Venkat	said.	“Maybe	you	should	just	tell	me	what	this	is about?”
Rich	looked	at	the	mess	of	papers	and	sighed.	“But	I	had	such	a	cool summary...”
“A	summary	for	what?”
“How	to	save	Watney.”
“That's	already	in	progress,”	Venkat	said.	“It's	a	last-ditch	effort, but-”
“The	Taiyang	Shen?”	Rich	snorted.	“That	won't	work.	You	can't	make a	Mars	probe	in	a	month.”
“We're	sure	as	hell	going	to	try,”	Venkat	said,	a	note	of	annoyance	in his	voice.
“Oh	sorry,	am	I	being	difficult?”	Rich	asked.	“I'm	not	good	with people.	Sometimes	I'm	difficult.	I	wish	people	would	just	tell	me.
Anyway,	the	Taiyang	Shen	is	critical.	In	fact,	my	idea	won't	work	without it.	But	a	Mars	probe?	Pfft.	C'mon.”
“All	right,”	Venkat	said.	“What's	your	idea?”
Rich	snatched	a	paper	from	the	desk.	“Here	it	is!”	He	handed	it	to Venkat	with	a	child-like	smile.
Venkat	took	the	summary	and	skimmed	it.	The	more	he	read,	the wider	his	eyes	got.	“Are	you	sure	about	this?” “Absolutely!”	Rich	beamed.
“Have	you	told	anyone	else?”
“Who	would	I	tell?”
“I	don't	know,	Venkat	said.	“Friends?”
“I	don't	have	any	of	those.”
“Ok,	keep	it	under	your	hat.”	Venkat	said.
“I	don't	wear	a	hat.”
“It's	just	an	expression.”
“Really?”	Rich	said.	“It's	a	stupid	expression.”
“Rich,	you're	being	difficult.”
“Ah.	Thanks.”


Vogel:
Being	your	backup	has	backfired.
I	guess	NASA	figured	botany	and	chemistry	are similar	because	they	both	end	in	“Y”.	One	way	or another,	I	ended	up	being	your	back-up	chemist.
Remember	when	they	made	you	spend	a	day explaining	your	experiments	to	me?	It	was	in	the middle	of	intense	mission	prep.	You	may	have forgotten.
You	started	my	training	by	buying	me	a	beer.
For	breakfast.	Germans	are	awesome.
Anyway,	now	that	I	have	time	to	kill,	NASA	gave me	a	pile	of	work.	And	all	your	chemistry	crap	is on	the	list.	So	now	I	have	to	do	boring-ass experiments	with	test	tubes	and	soil	and	pH	levels and	Zzzzzzzzzz....
My	life	is	now	a	desperate	struggle	for survival...	with		occasional	titration.
Frankly,	I	suspect	you're	a	super	villain.
You're	a	chemist,	you	have	a	German	accent,	you had	a	base	on	Mars...	what	more	can	there	be?
“What	the	....	is	'Project	Elrond'?”	Annie	asked.
“I	had	to	make	something	up,”	Venkat	said.
“So	you	came	up	with	'Elrond'?”	Annie	pressed.
“Because	it's	a	secret	meeting?”	Mitch	guessed.	“The	email	said	I couldn't	even	tell	my	assistant.”
“I'll	explain	everything	once	Teddy	arrives.”	Venkat	said.
“Why	does	'Elrond'	mean	'secret	meeting'?”	Annie	asked.
“Are	we	going	to	make	a	momentous	decision?”	Bruge	Ng	asked.
“Exactly,”	Venkat	said.
“How	did	you	know	that?”	Annie	asked,	getting	annoyed.
“Elrond,”	Bruce	said.	“The	Council	of	Elrond.	From	Lord	of	the
Rings.	It's	the	meeting	where	they	decide	to	destroy	The	One	Ring.”
“Jesus,”	Annie	said.	“None	of	you	got	laid	in	high	school,	did	you?”
“Good	morning,”	Teddy	said	as	he	walked	in.	Seating	himself,	he rested	his	hands	on	the	table.	“Anyone	know	what	this	meeting's	about?” He	asked.
“Wait,”	Mitch	said,	“Teddy	doesn't	even	know?”
Venkat	took	a	deep	breath.	“One	of	our	astrodynamicists,	Rich Purnell,	has	found	a	way	to	get	Hermes	back	to	Mars.	The	course	he	came up	with	would	give	Hermes	a	Mars	flyby	on	Sol	549.” Silence.
“You	shittin'	us?”	Annie	demanded.
“Sol	549?	How's	that	even	possible?”	Asked	Bruce.	“Even	Iris wouldn't	have	landed	till	Sol	588.”
“Iris	was	a	point-thrust	craft,”	Venkat	said.	“Hermes	has	a	constantthrust	ion	engine.	It's	always	accelerating.	Also,	Hermes	has	a	lot	of velocity	right	now.	On	their	current	Earth-intercept	course,	they	have	to decelerate	for	the	next	month	just	to	slow	down	to	Earth's	speed.”
Mitch	rubbed	the	back	of	his	head.	“Wow...	549.	That's	35	sols	before
Watney	runs	out	of	food.	That	would	solve	everything.”
Teddy	leaned	forward.	“Run	us	through	it,	Venkat.	What	would	it entail?”
“Well,”	Venkat	began,	“If	they	did	this	'Rich	Purnell	Maneuver,' they'd	start	accelerating	right	away,	to	preserve	their	velocity	and	gain even	more.	They	wouldn't	intercept	Earth	at	all,	but	would	come	close enough	to	use	a	gravity	assist	to	adjust	course.	Around	that	time,	they'd pick	up	a	re-supply	probe	with	provisions	for	the	extended	trip.
“After	that,	they'd	be	on	an	accelerating	orbit	toward	Mars,	arriving on	Sol	549.	Like	I	said,	it's	a	Mary	flyby.	This	isn't	anything	like	a	normal Ares	mission.	They'll	be	going	too	fast	to	fall	in	to	orbit.	The	rest	of	the maneuver	takes	them	back	to	Earth.	They'd	be	home	211	days	after	the flyby.”
“What	good	is	a	flyby?”	Bruce	asked.	“They	don't	have	any	way	to	get
Watney	off	the	surface.”
“Yeah...”	Venkat	said.	“Now	for	the	unpleasant	part:	Watney	would
have	to	get	to	the	Ares-4	MAV.”
“Schiaparelli	Crater!?”	Mitch	gaped.	“That's	3,200km	away!”
“3,235km	to	be	exact,”	Venkat	said.	“It's	not	out	of	the	question.	He drove	to	Pathfinder's	landing	site	and	back.	That's	over	1,500km.”
“That	was	over	flat,	desert	terrain,”	Bruce	chimed	in.	“But	the	trip	to
Schiaparelli-”
“Suffice	it	to	say,”	Venkat	interrupted,	“It	would	be	very	difficult	and dangerous.	But	we	have	a	lot	of	clever	scientists	to	help	him	trick	out	the
rover.	Also	there	would	be	MAV	modifications.”
“What's	wrong	with	the	MAV?”	Mitch	asked.
“It's	designed	to	get	to	low	Mars	orbit,”	Venkat	explained.	“But Hermes	would	be	on	a	flyby,	so	the	MAV	would	have	to	escape	Mars gravity	entirely	to	intercept.” “How?”	Mitch	asked.
“It'd	have	to	lose	weight...	a	lot	of	weight.	I	can	get	rooms	full	of people	working	on	these	problems	if	we	decide	to	do	this.”
“Earlier,”	Teddy	said,	“You	mentioned	a	supply	probe	for	Hermes.
We	have	that	capability?”
“Yes,	with	the	Taiyang	Shen,”	Venkat	said.	“We'd	shoot	for	a	nearEarth	rendezvous.	It's	a	lot	easier	than	getting	a	probe	to	Mars,	that's	for sure.”
“I	see,”	Teddy	said.	“So	we	have	two	options	on	the	table:	Send Watney	enough	food	to	last	until	Ares	4,	or	send	Hermes	back	to	get	him right	now.	Both	plans	require	the	Taiyang	Shen,	so	we	can	only	do	one.” “Yes,”	Venkat	said.	“We'll	have	to	pick	one.” They	all	took	a	moment	to	consider.
“What	about	the	Hermes	crew?”	Annie	asked,	breaking	the	silence. “Would	they	have	a	problem	with	adding...”	She	did	some	quick	math	in her	head	“533	days	to	their	mission?”
“They	wouldn't	hesitate,”	Mitch	said.	“Not	for	a	second.	That's	why Venkat	called	this	meeting.”	He	cast	a	disapproving	glare	at	Venkat.	“He wants	us	to	decide	instead.”
“That's	right,”	Venkat	said.
“It	should	be	Commander	Lewis'	call,”	Mitch	said	sternly.
“Pointless	to	even	ask	her,”	Venkat	said.	“We	need	to	make	this decision;	it's	a	matter	of	life	and	death.”
“She's	the	Mission	Commander,”	Mitch	said.	“Life	and	death decisions	are	her	damn	job.”
“Easy,	Mitch,”	Teddy	said.
“Bullshit,”	Mitch	said.	“You	guys	have	done	end-runs	around	the crew	every	time	something	goes	wrong.	You	didn't	tell	them	Watney	was
still	alive,	now	you're	not	telling	them	there's	a	rescue	option.”
“We	already	have	a	rescue	option,”	Teddy	said.	“We're	just discussing	another	one.”
“The	crash-lander?”	Mitch	said.	“Does	anyone	think	that'll	work?
Anyone?”
“All	right,	Mitch,”	Teddy	said.	“You've	expressed	your	opinion,	and we've	heard	it.	Let's	move	on.”	He	turned	to	Venkat.	“Can	Hermes function	for	533	days	beyond	the	scheduled	mission	end?”
“It	should,”	Venkat	said.	“The	crew	may	have	to	fix	things	here	and there,	but	they're	well	trained.	Remember,	Hermes	was	made	to	do	all	5
Ares	missions.	It's	only	halfway	through	its	designed	lifespan.”
“It's	the	most	expensive	thing	ever	built,”	Teddy	said.	“We	can't	make another	one.	If	something	went	wrong,	the	crew	would	die,	and	the	Ares
Program	with	them.”
“Losing	the	crew	would	be	a	disaster,”	Venkat	said.	“But	we	wouldn't lose	Hermes.	We	can	remotely	operate	it.	So	long	as	the	reactor	and	ion engines	continued	to	work,	we	could	bring	it	back.”
“Space	travel	is	dangerous,”	Mitch	said.	“We	can't	make	this	a discussion	about	what's	safest.”
“I	disagree,”	Teddy	said.	“This	is	absolutely	a	discussion	about	what's safest.	And	about	how	many	lives	are	at	stake.	Both	plans	are	risky,	but resupplying	Watney	only	risks	one	life	while	the	Rich	Purnell	Maneuver risks	six.”
“Consider	degree	of	risk,	Teddy,”	Venkat	said.	“Mitch	is	right.	The crash-lander	is	high-risk.	It	could	miss	Mars,	it	could	re-enter	wrong	and burn	up,	it	could	crash	too	hard	and	destroy	the	food...	we	estimate	30% chance	of	success.”
“A	near-Earth	rendezvous	with	Hermes	is	more	doable?”	Teddy asked.
“Much	more	doable,”	Venkat	confirmed.	“With	sub-second transmission	delays,	we	can	control	the	probe	directly	from	Earth	rather than	rely	on	automated	systems.	When	the	time	comes	to	dock,	Major Martinez	can	pilot	it	remotely	from	Hermes	with	no	transmission	delay	at all.	And	Hermes	has	a	human	crew,	able	to	overcome	any	hiccups	that may	happen.	And	we	don't	have	to	do	a	reentry;	the	supplies	don't	have	to survive	a	300m/s	impact.”
“So,”	Bruce	offered,	“We	can	have	a	high	chance	of	killing	one person,	or	a	low	chance	of	killing	6	people.	Jeez.	How	do	we	even	make this	decision?”
“We	talk	about	it,	then	Teddy	makes	the	decision,”	Venkat	said.	“Not sure	what	else	we	can	do.”
“We	could	let	Lewis-”	Mitch	began.
“Yeah,	other	than	that,”	Venkat	interrupted.
“Question,”	Annie	said.	“What	am	I	even	here	for?	This	seems	like something	for	you	nerds	to	discuss.”
“You	need	to	be	in	the	loop,”	Venkat	said.	“We're	not	deciding	right now.	We'll	need	to	quietly	research	the	details	internally.	Something might	leak,	and	you	need	to	be	ready	to	dance	around	questions.” “How	long	have	we	got	to	make	a	decision?”	Teddy	asked.
“The	window	for	starting	the	maneuver	ends	in	39	hours.”
“All	right,”	Teddy	said.	“Everyone,	we	discuss	this	only	in	person	or on	the	phone;	never	email.	And	don't	talk	to	anyone	about	this,	other	than the	people	here.	The	last	thing	we	need	is	public	opinion	pressing	for	a risky	cowboy	rescue	that	may	be	impossible.”
		Beck:
Hey,	man.	How	ya	been?
Now	that	I'm	in	a	“dire	situation,”	I	don't have	to	follow	social	rules	anymore.	I	can	be honest	with	everyone.
Bearing	that	in	mind,	I	have	to	say...	dude... you	need	to	tell	Johanssen	how	you	feel.	If	you don’t,	you’ll	regret	it	forever.
I	won't	lie:	It	could	end	badly.	I	have	no	idea what	she	thinks	of	you.	Or	of	anything.	She's weird.
But	wait	till	the	mission’s	over.	You're	on	a ship	with	her	for	another	two	months.	Also,	if	you guys	got	up	to	anything	while	the	mission	was	in progress,	Lewis	would	kill	you.
Venkat,	Mitch,	Annie,	Bruce,	and	Teddy	met	secretly	for	the	second time	in	as	many	days.	“Project	Elrond”	had	taken	on	a	dark	connotation, veiled	in	secrecy.	Many	people	knew	the	name,	none	knew	its	purpose.
Speculation	ran	rampant.	Some	thought	it	was	a	completely	new program	in	the	works.	Others	worried	it	might	be	a	move	to	cancel	Ares	4 and	5.	Most	thought	it	was	Ares	6	in	the	works.
“It	wasn't	an	easy	decision,”	Teddy	said	to	the	assembled	elite.	“But
I've	decided	to	go	with	Iris	2.	No	Rich	Purnell	Maneuver.” Mitch	slammed	his	fist	on	the	table.
“We'll	do	all	we	can	to	make	it	work,”	Bruce	said.
“If	it's	not	too	much	to	ask,”	Venkat	began.	“What	made	up	your mind?”
Teddy	sighed.	“It's	a	matter	of	risk,”	he	said.	“Iris	2	only	risks	one life.	Rich	Purnell	risks	all	six	of	them.	I	know	Rich	Purnell	is	more	likely to	work,	but	I	don't	think	it's	six	times	more	likely.”	“You	....	coward,”	Mitch	said.
“Mitch...”	Venkat	said.
“You	god	damned	....	coward,”	Mitch	continued,	ignoring
Venkat.	“You	just	want	to	cut	your	losses.	You're	on	damage	control.	You don't	give	a	shit	about	Watney's	life.”
“Of	course	I	do,”	Teddy	replied.	“And	I'm	sick	of	your	infantile
attitude.	You	can	throw	all	the	tantrums	you	want,	but	the	rest	of	us	have to	be	adults.	This	isn't	a	TV	show;	the	riskier	solution	isn't	always	the best.”
“Space	is	dangerous,”	Mitch	snapped.	“It's	what	we	do	here.	If	you want	to	play	it	safe	all	the	time,	go	join	an	insurance	company.	And	by the	way,	it's	not	even	your	life	you're	risking.	The	crew	can	make	up	their own	minds	about	it.”
“No	they	can't,”	Teddy	fired	back.	“They're	too	emotionally	involved. Clearly,	so	are	you.	I'm	not	gambling	five	lives	to	save	one.	Especially when	we	might	save	him	without	risking	them	at	all.”
“Bullshit!”	Mitch	shot	back	as	he	stood	from	his	chair.	“You're	just convincing	yourself	the	crash-lander	will	work	so	you	don't	have	to	take	a risk.	You're	hanging	him	out	to	dry,	you	chicken-shit	son	of	a	bitch!” He	stormed	out	of	the	room,	slamming	the	door	behind	him.
After	a	few	seconds,	Venkat	followed	behind,	saying	“I'll	make	sure he	cools	off.”
Bruce	slumped	in	his	chair.	“Sheesh,”	he	said,	nervously.	“We're scientists,	for	Christ's	sake.	What	the	hell!?”
Annie	quietly	gathered	her	things	and	placed	them	in	her	briefcase.
Teddy	looked	to	her.	“Sorry	about	that,	Annie,”	he	said.	“What	can	I say?	Sometimes	men	let	testosterone	take	over-”
“I	was	hoping	he'd	kick	your	ass,”	she	interrupted.
“What?”
“I	know	you	care	about	the	astronauts,	but	he's	right.	You	are	a
....	coward.	If	you	had	balls	we	might	be	able	to	save	Watney.”
Lewis:
Hi,	Commander.
Between	training	and	our	trip	to	Mars,	I	spent
2	years	working	with	you.	I	think	I	know	you pretty	well.	So	I’m		guessing	you	blame	yourself for	my	situation.
Don’t.
You	were	faced	with	an	impossible	scenario	and made	a	tough	decision.	That’s	what	Commanders	do. And	your	decision	was	right.	If	you’d	waited	any longer,	the	MAV	would	have	tipped.
I’m	sure	you’ve	run	through	all	the	possible outcomes	in	your	head,	so	you	know	there’s	nothing you	could	have	done	differently	(other	than	“be psychic”).
You	probably	think	losing	a	crewman	is	the worst	thing		that	can	happen.	Not	true.	Losing	the whole	crew	is	worse.	You	kept	that	from happening.
But	there's	something	more	important	we	need	to discuss:	What	is	it	with	you	and	Disco?	I	can understand	the	'70's	TV	because	everyone	loves hairy	people	with	huge	collars.	But	Disco?
Disco!?


Vogel	checked	the	position	and	orientation	of	Hermes	against	the projected	path.	It	matched,	as	usual.	In	addition	to	being	the	mission's chemist,	he	was	also	an	accomplished	astrophysicist.	Though	his	duties as	navigator	were	laughably	easy.
The	computer	knew	the	course.	It	knew	when	to	angle	the	ship	so	the ion	engines	would	be	aimed	correctly.	And	it	knew	the	location	of	the ship	at	all	times	(easily	calculated	from	the	position	of	the	sun	and	Earth, and	knowing	the	exact	time	from	an	on-board	atomic	clock.)
Barring	a	complete	computer	failure	or	other	critical	event,	Vogel’s vast	knowledge	of	astrodynamics	would	never	come	in	to	play.
Completing	the	check,	he	ran	a	diagnostic	on	the	engines.	They	were functioning	at	peak.	He	did	all	this	from	his	quarters.	All	on-board computers	could	control	all	ship's	functions.	Gone	were	the	days	of physically	visiting	the	engines	to	check	up	on	them.
Having	completed	his	work	for	the	day,	he	finally	had	time	to	read
email.
Sorting	through	the	messages	NASA	deemed	worthy	to	upload,	he read	the	most	interesting	first	and	responded	when	necessary.	His responses	were	cached	and	would	be	sent	to	Earth	with	Johanssen's	next uplink.
A	message	from	his	wife	caught	his	attention.	Titled	Unsere	kinder (“our	children”),	it	contained	nothing	but	an	image	attachment.	He	raised an	eyebrow.	Several	things	stood	out	at	once.	Firstly,	“kinder”	should have	been	capitalized.	Helena,	a	grammar	school	teacher	in	Bremen,	was very	unlikely	to	make	that	mistake.	Also,	to	each	other,	they affectionately	called	their	kids	Die	Affen.
Attempting	to	open	the	image,	his	viewer	reported	the	file	was unreadable.
He	walked	down	the	narrow	hallway.	The	crew	quarters	stood	against the	outer	hull	of	the	constantly-spinning	ship	to	maximize	simulated gravity.	Johanssen's	door	was	open,	as	usual.
“Johanssen.	Good	evening,”	Vogel	said.	The	crew	kept	the	same	sleep schedule,	and	it	was	nearing	bedtime.
“Oh,	hello,”	Johanssen	said,	looking	up	from	her	computer.
“I	have	the	computer	problem,”	Vogel	explained.	“I	wonder	if	you will	help.”
“Sure,”	she	said.
“You	are	in	the	personal	time,”	Vogel	said.	“Perhaps	tomorrow	when you	are	on	the	duty	is	better?”
“Now's	fine,”	she	said.	“What's	wrong?”
“It	is	a	file.	It	is	an	image,	but	my	computer	can	not	view.” “Where's	the	file?”	she	asked,	typing	on	her	keyboard. “It	is	on	my	shared	space.	The	name	is	'kinder.jpg'.” “Let's	take	a	look,”	she	said.
Her	fingers	flew	over	her	keyboard	as	windows	opened	and	closed	on her	screen.	“Definitely	a	bad	jpg	header,”	she	said.	“Probably	mangled	in the	download.	Lemme	look	with	a	hex	editor,	see	if	we	got	anything	at all...”
After	a	few	moments	she	said.	“This	isn't	a	jpg.	It's	a	plain	ASCII	text file.	Looks	like...	well	I	don't	know	what	it	is.	Looks	like	a	bunch	of	math formulae.”	She	gestured	to	the	screen.	“Does	any	of	this	make	sense	to you?”
Vogel	leaned	in,	looking	at	the	text.	“Ja,”	he	said.	“It	is	a	course maneuver	for	Hermes.	It	says	the	name	is	'Rich	Purnell	Maneuver'.” “What's	that?”	Johanssen	asked.
“I	have	not	heard	of	this	maneuver.”	He	looked	at	the	tables.	“It	is complicated...	very	complicated...”
He	froze.	“Sol	549!?”	he	exclaimed.	“Mein	Gott!”


The	Hermes	crew	enjoyed	their	scant	personal	time	in	an	area	called “The	Rec”.	Consisting	of	a	table	and	barely	room	to	seat	six,	it	ranked low	in	gravity	priority.	It's	position	amidships	granted	it	a	mere	0.2g.
Still,	it	was	enough	to	keep	everyone	in	their	seats	as	they	pondered what	Vogel	told	them.
“...and	then	mission	would	conclude	with	Earth	intercept	211	days later,”	he	finished	up.
“Thank	you,	Vogel,”	Lewis	said.	She'd	heard	the	explanation	earlier when	Vogel	came	to	her,	but	Johanssen,	Martinez,	and	Beck	were	hearing it	for	the	first	time.	She	gave	them	a	moment	to	digest.
“Would	this	really	work?”	Martinez	asked.
“Ja,”	Vogel	nodded.	“I	ran	the	numbers.	They	all	check	out.	It	is brilliant	course.	Amazing.”
“How	would	he	get	off	Mars?”	Martinez	asked.
Lewis	leaned	forward.	“There	was	more	in	the	message,”	she	began.
“The	maneuver	is	part	of	an	overall	idea	NASA	had	to	rescue	Watney.
We'd	have	to	pick	up	a	supply	near	Earth,	and	he'd	have	to	get	to	Ares-4's
MAV.”
“Why	all	the	cloak	and	dagger?”	Beck	asked.
“According	to	the	message,”	Lewis	explained.	“NASA	rejected	the idea.	They'd	rather	take	a	big	risk	on	Watney	than	a	small	risk	on	all	of us.	Whoever	snuck	it	in	to	Vogel's	email	obviously	disagreed.”
“So,”	Martinez	said,	“We're	talking	about	going	directly	against
NASA's	decision?”
“Yes,”	Lewis	confirmed,	“That's	what	we're	talking	about.	If	we	do the	maneuver,	they'll	have	to	send	the	supply	ship	or	we'll	die.	We	have the	opportunity	to	force	their	hand.”
“Are	we	going	to	do	it?”	Johanssen	asked.
They	all	looked	to	Lewis.
“I	won't	lie,”	she	said.	“I'd	sure	as	hell	like	to.	But	this	isn't	a	normal decision.	This	is	something	NASA	expressly	rejected.	We're	talking about	mutiny.	And	that's	not	a	word	I	throw	around	lightly.”
She	stood	and	paced	slowly	around	the	table.	“We'll	only	do	it	if	we all	agree.	And	before	you	answer,	consider	the	consequences.	If	we	mess up	the	supply	rendezvous,	we	die.	If	we	mess	up	the	Earth	gravity	assist, we	die.
“If	we	do	everything	perfectly,	we	add	533	days	to	our	mission.	533 days	of	unplanned	space	travel	where	anything	could	go	wrong.
Maintenance	will	be	a	hassle.	Something	might	break	that	we	can't	fix.	If it's	life-critical,	we	die.”
“Sign	me	up!”	Martinez	smiled.
“Easy,	cowboy,”	Lewis	said.	“You	and	I	are	military.	There's	a	good chance	we'd	be	court-martialed	when	we	got	home.	As	for	the	rest	of	you,
I	guarantee	they'll	never	send	you	up	again.”
Martinez	leaned	against	the	wall,	arms	folded	with	a	half	grin	on	his face.	The	rest	silently	considered	what	their	commander	had	said.
“If	we	do	this,”	Vogel	said.	“It	would	be	over	1000	days	of	space.
This	is	enough	space	for	a	life.	I	do	not	need	to	return.”
“Sounds	like	Vogel's	in,”	Martinez	grinned.	“Me,	too,	obviously.” “Let's	do	it,”	Beck	said.
“If	you	think	it'll	work,”	Johanssen	said	to	Lewis,	“I	trust	you.”
“Ok,”	Lewis	said.	“If	we	go	for	it,	what's	involved?”
Vogel	shrugged.	“I	plot	the	course	and	execute	it,”	he	said.	“What else?”
“Remote	Override,”	Johanssen	said.	“It's	designed	to	get	the	ship	back if	we	all	die	or	something.	They	can	take	over	Hermes	from	Mission Control.”
“But	we're	right	here,”	Lewis	said.	“We	can	undo	whatever	they	try, right?”
“Not	really,”	Johanssen	said.	“Remote	Override	takes	priority	over any	on-board	controls.	Its	assumes	there's	been	a	disaster	and	the	ship's control	panels	can't	be	trusted.”
“Can	you	disable	it?”	Lewis	asked.
“Hmm...”	Johanssen	pondered.	“Hermes	has	four	redundant	flight computers,	each	connected	to	three	redundant	comm	systems.	If	any computer	gets	signal	from	any	comm	system,	Mission	Control	can	take over.	We	can't	shut	down	the	comms;	we'd	lose	telemetry	and	guidance. We	can't	shut	down	the	computers;	we	need	them	to	control	the	ship.	I'll have	to	disable	the	Remote	Override	on	each	system...	It's	part	of	the	OS,
I'll	have	to	jump	over	the	code...	yes.	I	can	do	it.”
“You're	sure?”	Lewis	asked.	“You	can	turn	it	off?”
“Shouldn't	be	hard,”	Johanssen	said.	“It's	an	emergency	feature,	not	a security	program.	It	isn't	protected	against	malicious	code.”
“Malicious	code?”	Beck	smiled.	“So...	you'll	be	a	hacker?”
“Yeah,”	Johanssen	smiled	back.	“I	guess	I	will.”
“All	right,”	Lewis	said.	“Looks	like	we	can	do	it.	But	I	don't	want peer	pressure	forcing	anyone	into	it.	We'll	wait	for	24	hours.	During	that time,	anyone	can	change	their	mind.	Just	talk	to	me	in	private	or	send	me an	email.	I'll	call	it	off	and	never	tell	anyone	who	it	was.”
Lewis	stayed	behind	as	the	rest	filed	out.	Watching	them	leave,	she saw	they	were	smiling.	All	four	of	them.	For	the	first	time	since	leaving Mars,	they	were	back	to	their	old	selves.	She	knew	right	then	no	one would	change	their	mind.
They	were	going	back	to	Mars.


Everyone	knew	Brendan	Hutch	would	be	running	missions	soon.
He	rose	through	the	ranks	as	fast	as	one	could	in	the	large,	inertiabound	organization.	Known	as	a	diligent	worker,	his	skill	and	leadership qualities	were	plain	to	all	his	subordinates.
Brendan	was	in	charge	of	Mission	Control	from	1am	to	9am	every
night.	Continued	excellent	performance	in	this	role	would	certainly	net him	a	promotion.	It	was	already	announced	he'd	be	back-up	Flight Controller	for	Ares-4,	and	he	had	a	good	shot	at	the	top	job	for	Ares-5.
“Flight,	CAPCOM,”	came	a	voice	through	his	headset.
“Go	CAPCOM,”	Brendan	responded.	Though	they	were	in	the	same room,	radio	protocol	was	observed	at	all	times.
“Unscheduled	status	update	from	Hermes.”
With	Hermes	90	light-seconds	away,	back-and-forth	voice communication	was	impractical.	Other	than	media	relations,	Hermes would	communicate	via	text	until	they	were	much	closer.
“Roger,”	Brendan	said.	“Read	it	out.”
“I...	I	don't	get	it,	Flight,”	came	the	confused	reply.	“No	real	status, just	a	single	sentence.”
“What's	it	say?”
“Message	reads:	'Houston,	be	advised:	Rich	Purnell	is	a	steely-eyed missile	man.'”
“What?”	Brendan	asked.	“Who	the	hell	is	Rich	Purnell?” “Flight,	Telemetry,”	came	another	voice.
“Go	Telemetry,”	Brendan	said.
“Hermes	is	off-course.”
“CAPCOM,	advise	Hermes	they're	drifting.	Telemetry,	get	a correction	vector	ready-”
“Negative,	Flight,”	Telemetry	interrupted.	“It's	not	drift.	They adjusted	course.	Instrumentation	uplink	shows	a	deliberate	27.812	degree rotation.”
“What	the	hell?”	Brendan	stammered.	“CAPCOM,	ask	them	what	the hell.”
“Roger	Flight...	message	sent.	Minimum	reply	time	3	minutes,	4 seconds.”
“Telemetry,	any	chance	this	is	instrumentation	failure?”
“Negative,	Flight.	We're	tracking	them	with	SatCon.	Observed position	is	consistent	with	the	course	change.”
“CAPCOM,	Read	your	logs	and	see	what	the	previous	shift	did.	See	if a	massive	course	change	was	ordered	and	somehow	nobody	told	us.” “Roger,	Flight.”
“Guidance,	Flight.”	Brendan	said.
“Go	Flight,”	came	the	reply	from	the	Guidance	Controller.
“Work	out	how	long	they	can	stay	on	this	course	before	it's irreversible.	At	what	point	will	they	no	longer	be	able	to	intercept	Earth?”
“Working	on	that	now,	Flight.”
“And	somebody	find	out	who	the	hell	Rich	Purnell	is!”


Mitch	sat	comfortably	in	Teddy's	office.
“Why'd	you	do	it,	Mitch?”	Teddy	demanded.
“Do	what?”	Mitch	asked.
“You	know	damn	well	what	I'm	talking	about.”
“Oh,	you	mean	the	Hermes	mutiny?”	Mitch	said	innocently.	“You know,	that'd	make	a	good	movie	title.	'The	Hermes	Mutiny.'	Got	a	nice ring	to	it.”
“We	know	you	did	it,”	Teddy	said	sternly.	“We	don't	know	how,	but we	know	you	sent	them	the	maneuver.”
“I	suppose	you	have	proof,	then?”
Teddy	glared.	“No.	Not	yet,	but	we're	working	on	it.”
“Really?”	Mitch	said.	“Is	that	really	the	best	use	of	our	time?	I	mean, we	have	a	near-Earth	resupply	to	plan,	not	to	mention	figuring	out	how	to get	Watney	to	Schiaparelli.		We've	got	a	lot	on	our	plates.”
“You're	damn	right	we	have	a	lot	on	our	plates!”	Teddy	fumed.	“After your	little	stunt,	we're	committed	to	this	thing.”
“Alleged	stunt,”	Mitch	said.	“I	suppose	Annie	will	tell	the	media	we decided	to	try	this	risky	maneuver?	And	she'll	leave	out	the	mutiny	part?”
“Of	course,”	Teddy	said.	“Otherwise	we'd	look	like	idiots.”
“Guess	that's	me	off	the	hook	then!”	Mitch	smiled.	“Can't	fire	me	for enacting	NASA	policy.	Allegedly	enacting	it,	that	is.	I	guess	Lewis	is	off the	hook,	too.	And	maybe	Watney	gets	to	live.	Happy	endings	all around!”
“You	may	have	killed	the	whole	crew,”	Teddy	countered.	“Ever	think of	that?”
“Whomever	gave	them	the	maneuver,”	Mitch	said,	“only	passed	along information.	Lewis	made	the	decision	to	act	on	it.	If	she	let	emotion cloud	her	judgment,	she'd	be	a	shitty	commander.	And	she's	not	a	shitty commander.”
“If	I	can	ever	prove	it	was	you,	I'll	find	a	way	to	fire	you	for	it.” Teddy	warned.
“Sure,”	Mitch	shrugged.	“But	if	I	wasn't	willing	to	take	risks	to	save lives,	I'd...”	He	thought	for	a	moment.	“Well,	I	guess	I'd	be	you.”

	 
Chapter	17
LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	192
Holy	shit!
They're	coming	back	for	me!
I	don't	even	know	how	to	react.	I'm	choked	up!
And	I've	got	a	shitload	of	work	to	do	before	I	catch	that	bus	home.
They	can't	orbit.	If	I'm	not	in	space	when	they	pass	by,	all	they	can	do is	wave.
I	have	to	get	to	Ares-4's	MAV.	Even	NASA	accepts	that.	And	when the	nannies	at	NASA	recommend	a	3200km	overland	drive,	you	know you're	trouble.
Schiaparelli	Crater	here	I	come!
Well...	not	right	away.	I	still	have	to	do	the	aforementioned	shitload of	work.
My	trip	to	Pathfinder	was	a	quick	jaunt	compared	to	the	epic	journey that's	coming	up.	I	got	away	with	a	lot	of	shortcuts	because	I	only	had	to survive	18	sols.	This	time,	things	are	different.
I	averaged	80km/sol	on	my	way	to	Pathfinder.	If	I	do	that	well	toward Schiaparelli	it'll	take	40	sols.	Call	it	50	to	be	safe.
But	there's	more	to	it	than	just	travel.	Once	I	get	there,	I'll	need	to	set up	camp	and	do	a	bunch	of	MAV	modifications.	NASA	estimates	they'll take	30	sols,	45	to	be	safe.	Between	the	trip	and	the	MAV	mods,	that's	95 sols.	Call	it	100	because	“95”	cries	out	to	be	approximated.
So	I'll	need	to	survive	away	from	the	Hab	for	100	sols.
“What	about	the	MAV?”	I	hear	you	ask	(in	my	fevered	imagination).
“Won't	it	have	some	supplies?	Air	and	water	at	the	very	least?” Nope.	It's	got	....-all.
It	does	have	air	tanks,	but	they're	empty.	An	Ares	mission	needs	lots of	O2,	N2	and	water	anyway.	Why	send	more	with	the	MAV?	Easier	to have	the	crew	top	off	the	MAV	from	the	Hab.	Fortunately	for	my crewmates,	the	mission	plan	had	Martinez	fill	the	MAV	tanks	on	Sol	1.
The	flyby	is	on	Sol	549,	so	I'll	need	to	leave	by	449.	That	gives	me 257	sols	to	get	my	shit	in	gear.
Seems	like	a	long	time,	doesn't	it?
In	that	time,	I	need	to	modify	the	rover	to	carry	the	Atmospheric
Regulator,	Oxygenator,	and	Water	Reclaimer.	I	call	them	“The	Big Three”.	All	three	need	to	be	in	the	pressurized	area,	but	the	rover	isn't	big enough.	All	three	need	to	be	running	at	all	times,	but	the	rover's	batteries can't	handle	that	load	for	long.
The	rover	will	also	need	to	carry	all	my	food,	water,	solar	cells,	extra battery,	my	tools,	some	spare	parts,	and	Pathfinder.	As	my	sole	means	of communication	with	NASA,	Pathfinder	gets	to	ride	on	the	roof,	Granny Clampett	style.
I	have	a	lot	of	problems	to	solve,	but	I	have	a	lot	of	smart	people	to solve	them.	Pretty	much	the	whole	planet	Earth.
NASA	is	still	working	on	the	details,	but	the	idea	is	to	use	both rovers.	One	to	drive	around,	the	other	to	act	as	a	trailer	for	all	the	shit	I have	to	bring.
I'll	have	to	make	structural	changes	to	that	trailer.	And	by	“structural changes”	I	mean	“cut	a	big	hole	in	the	hull.”	Then	I	can	move	the	Big Three	in	and	use	Hab	canvas	to	loosely	cover	the	hole.	It'll	balloon	out when	I	pressurize	the	rover,	but	it'll	hold.

How	will	I	cut	a	big	chunk	out	of	a	rover's	hull?	I'll	let	my	lovely assistant	Venkat	Kapoor	explain	further:

[14:38]JPL:	I'm	sure	you're	wondering	how	to cut	a	hole	in	the	rover.
Our	experiments	show	a	rock	sample	drill	can get	through	the	hull.	Wear	and	tear	on	the	bit	is minimal	(rocks	are	harder	than	carbon	composite). You	can	cut	holes	in	a	line,	then	chisel	out	the remaining	chunks	between	them.
I	hope	you	like	drilling.	The	drill	bit	is	1cm wide,	the	holes	will	be	0.5cm	apart,	and	the length	of	the	total	cut	is	11.4m.	That's	760 holes.	And	each	one	takes	160	seconds	to	drill.
Problem:	The	drills	weren't	designed	for construction	projects.	They	were	intended	for quick	rock	samples.	The	batteries	only	last	240 seconds.	You	do	have	two	drills,	but	you'd	still only	get	3	holes	done	before	needing	to	recharge.
And	recharging	takes	41	minutes.
That's	173	hours	of	work,	limited	to	8	EVA hours	per	day.	That's	21	days	of	drilling,	and that's	just	too	long.	All	our	other	ideas	hinge	on this	cut	working.	If	it	doesn't,	we	need	time	to come	up	with	new	ones.
So	we	want	you	to	wire	a	drill	directly	to	Hab power.
The	drill	expects	28.8V	and	pulls	9	Amps.	The only	lines	that	can	handle	that	are	the	rover recharge	lines.	They're	36V,	10A	max.	Since	you have	two,	we're	comfortable	with	you	modifying one.
We'll	send	you	instructions	on	how	to	step	down the	voltage	and	put	a	new	breaker	in	the	line,	but I'm	sure	you	already	know	how.
I'll	be	playing	with	high	voltage	power	tomorrow.	Can't	imagine anything	going	wrong	with	that!
LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	193
I	managed	to	not	kill	myself	today,	even	though	I	was	working	with high	voltage.	Well,	it's	not	as	exciting	as	all	that.	I	disconnected	the	line before	I	....	with	it.
As	instructed,	I	turned	a	rover	charging	cable	into	a	drill	power source.	Getting	the	voltage	was	a	simple	matter	of	adding	resistors,	which my	electronics	kit	has	in	abundance.
I	had	to	make	my	own	a	9	Amp	breaker.	I	strung	three	3A	breakers	in parallel.	There's	no	way	for	9A	to	get	through	that	without	tripping	all three	in	rapid	succession.
Then	I	had	to	rewire	a	drill.	Pretty	much	the	same	thing	I	did	with Pathfinder.	Take	out	the	battery	and	replace	it	with	a	power	line	from	the Hab.	But	this	time	it	was	a	lot	easier.
Pathfinder	was	too	big	to	fit	through	any	of	my	airlocks,	so	I	had	to do	all	the	rewiring	outside.	Ever	done	electronics	while	wearing	a	space suit?	Pain	in	the	ass.	I	even	had	to	make	a	workbench	out	of	MAV landing	struts,	remember?
Anyway,	the	drill	fit	in	the	airlock	easily.	It's	only	a	meter	tall,	and shaped	like	a	jackhammer.	We	did	our	rock	sampling	standing	up,	like Apollo	astronauts.
Also,	unlike	my	Pathfinder	hatchet-job,	I	had	the	full	schematics	of the	drill.	I	removed	the	battery	and	attached	a	power	line	where	it	used	to be.	Then,	taking	the	drill	and	it's	new	cord	outside,	I	connected	it	to	the modified	rover	charger	and	fired	it	up.
Worked	like	a	charm!	The	drill	whirled	away	with	happy	abandon. Somehow,	I	had	managed	to	do	everything	right	the	first	try.	Deep	down, I	thought	I'd	fry	the	drill	for	sure.
It	wasn't	even	midday	yet.	I	figured	why	not	get	a	jump	on	drilling?

[10:07]	Watney:	Power	line	modifications complete.	Hooked	it	up	to	a	drill,	and	it	works great.	Plenty	of	daylight	left.	Send	me	a description	of	that	hole	you	want	me	to	cut.
[10:25]	JPL:	Glad	to	hear	it.	Starting	on	the cut	sounds	great.	Just	to	be	clear,	these	are modifications	to	Rover	1,	which	we've	been	calling
“the	trailer.”	Rover	2	(the	one	with	your modifications	for	the	trip	to	Pathfinder)	should remain	as-is	for	now.
You'll	be	taking	a	chunk	out	of	the	roof,	just in	front	of	the	airlock	in	the	rear	of	the vehicle.	The	hole	needs	to	be	at	least	2.5m	long and	the	full	2m	width	of	the	pressure	vessel.
Before	any	cuts,	draw	the	shape	on	the	trailer, and	position	the	trailer	where	Pathfinder's	camera can	see	it.	We'll	let	you	know	if	you	got	it right.
[10:43]	Watney:	Roger.	Take	a	pic	at	11:30	if you	haven't	heard	from	me	by	then.

The	rovers	are	made	to	interlock	so	one	can	tow	the	other.	That	way you	can	rescue	your	crewmates	if	the	shit	hits	the	fan.	For	that	same reason,	rovers	can	share	air	via	hoses	you	connect	between	them.	That little	feature	will	let	me	share	atmosphere	with	the	trailer	on	my	long drive.
I'd	stolen	the	trailer's	battery	long	ago;	it	had	no	ability	to	move	under it's	own	power.	So	I	hitched	it	up	to	my	awesomely	modified	rover	and towed	it	in	to	place	near	Pathfinder.
Venkat	told	me	to	“draw”	the	shape	I	plan	to	cut,	but	he	neglected	to mention	how.	It's	not	like	I	have	a	Sharpie	that	can	work	out	on	the surface.	So	I	vandalized	Martinez's	bed.
The	cots	are	basically	hammocks.	Lightweight	string	woven	loosely into	something	that's	comfortable	to	sleep	on.	Every	gram	counts	when making	stuff	to	send	to	Mars.
I	unraveled	Martinez's	bed	and	took	the	string	outside.	I	taped	it	to	the trailer	hull	along	the	path	I	planned	to	cut.	Yes,	of	course	duct	tape	works in	a	near-vacuum.	Duct	tape	works	anywhere.	Duct	tape	is	magic	and should	be	worshiped.
I	can	see	what	NASA	has	in	mind.	The	rear	of	the	trailer	has	an airlock	that	we're	not	going	to	mess	with.	The	cut	is	just	ahead	of	it,	and will	leave	plenty	of	space	for	The	Big	Three	to	stand.
I	have	no	idea	how	NASA	plans	to	power	the	Big	Three	for	24½	hours
a	day	and	still	have	energy	left	to	drive.	I	bet	they	don't	know,	either.	But they're	smart;	they'll	work	something	out.

[11:49]	JPL:	What	we	can	see	of	your	planned cut	looks	good.	We're	assuming	the	other	side	is identical.	You're	cleared	to	start	drilling.
[12:07]	Watney:	That's	what	she	said.
[12:25]	JPL:	Seriously,	Mark?	Seriously?

First,	I	depressurized	the	trailer.	Call	me	crazy,	but	I	didn't	want	the drill	explosively	launched	at	my	face.
Then	I	had	to	pick	somewhere	to	start.	I	thought	it'd	be	easiest	to	start on	the	side.	I	was	wrong.
The	roof	would	have	been	better.	The	side	was	a	hassle	because	I	had to	hold	the	drill	parallel	to	the	ground.	This	isn't	your	dad's	Black	& Decker	we're	talking	about.	It's	a	meter	long	and	only	safe	to	hold	by	the handles.
Getting	it	to	bite	was	nasty.	I	pressed	it	against	the	hull	and	turned	it on,	but	it	wandered	all	over	the	place.	So	I	got	my	trusty	hammer	and screwdriver.	With	a	few	taps,	I	made	a	small	chip	in	the	carbon composite.
That	gave	the	bit	a	place	to	seat,	so	I	could	keep	drilling	in	one	place.
As	NASA	predicted,	it	took	about	two	minutes	to	get	all	the	way	through.
I	followed	the	same	procedure	for	the	second	hole	and	it	went	much smoother.	After	the	third	hole,	the	drill's	overheat	light	came	on.
It	wasn't	designed	to	operate	constantly	for	so	long.	Fortunately,	it sensed	the	overheat	and	warned	me.	So	I	leaned	it	against	the	workbench for	a	few	minutes	and	it	cooled	down.	One	thing	you	can	say	about	Mars: It's	really	cold.	The	thin	atmosphere	doesn't	conduct	heat	very	well,	but	it cools	everything	eventually.
I	had	already	removed	the	drill's	cowling	(the	power	cord	needed	a way	in).	A	pleasant	side	effect	is	the	drill	cools	even	faster.	Though	I'll have	to	clean	it	thoroughly	every	few	hours	as	dust	accumulates.
By	17:00,	when	the	sun	began	to	set,	I	had	drilled	75	holes.	A	good
start,	but	there's	still	tons	to	do.	Eventually	(probably	tomorrow)	I'll	have to	start	drilling	holes	that	I	can't	reach	from	the	ground.	For	that	I'll	need something	to	stand	on.
I	can't	use	my	“workbench.”	It's	got	Pathfinder	on	it,	and	the	last thing	I'm	going	to	do	is	mess	with	that.	But	I've	got	three	more	MAV landing	struts.	I'm	sure	I	can	make	a	ramp	or	something.
Anyway,	that's	all	stuff	for	tomorrow.	Tonight	is	about	eating	a	full ration	for	dinner.
Awww	yeah.	That's	right.	I'm	either	getting	rescued	on	Sol	549	or	I'm dying.	That	means	I	have	35	days	of	extra	food.	I	can	indulge	once	in	a while.


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	194

I	average	a	hole	every	3.5	minutes.	That	includes	the	occasional breather	to	let	the	drill	cool	off.
I	learned	this	by	spending	all	damn	day	drilling.	After	8	hours	of	dull, physically	intense	work,	I	had	137	holes	to	show	for	it.
It	turned	out	to	be	easy	to	deal	with	places	I	couldn't	reach.	I	didn't need	to	modify	a	landing	strut	after	all.	I	just	had	to	get	something	to stand	on.	I	used	a	geological	sample	container	(also	known	as	“a	box”).
Before	I	was	in	contact	with	NASA,	I	would	have	worked	more	than	8 hours.	I	can	stay	out	for	10	before	even	dipping	in	to	“emergency”	air. But	NASA's	got	a	lot	of	Nervous	Nellies	who	don't	want	me	out	longer than	spec.
With	today's	work,	I'm	about	¼	of	the	way	through	the	whole	cut.	At least,	¼	of	the	way	through	the	drilling.	Then	I'll	have	759	little	chunks	to chisel	out.	And	I'm	not	sure	how	well	carbon	composite	is	going	to	take to	that.	But	NASA'll	do	it	a	thousand	times	back	on	Earth	and	tell	me	the best	way	to	get	it	done.
Anyway,	at	this	rate,	it'll	take	4	more	days	of	(boring-ass)	work	to finish	the	drilling.
I've	actually	exhausted	Lewis's	supply	of	shitty	'70's	TV.	And	I've
read	all	of	Johanssen's	mystery	books.
I	rifled	through	other	crewmates'	stuff	to	find	entertainment.	But	all of	Vogel's	stuff	is	in	German,	Beck	brought	nothing	but	medical	journals, and	Martinez	didn't	bring	anything.
I'm	got	really	bored,	so	I	decided	to	pick	a	theme	song!
Something	appropriate.	And	naturally,	it	should	be	something	from Lewis's	godawful	'70's	collection.	It	wouldn't	be	right	any	other	way.
There	are	plenty	of	great	candidates:	Life	on	Mars	by	David	Bowie, Rocket	Man	by	Elton	John,	Alone	Again	(Naturally)	by	Gilbert O'Sullivan.
But	I	settled	on	Stayin'	Alive	by	the	Bee	Gees.
LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	195
Another	day,	another	bunch	of	holes.	145	this	time	(I'm	getting better.)	I'm	half-way	done.	This	is	getting	really	old.
But	at	least	I	have	encouraging	messages	from	Venkat	to	cheer	me on!
[17:12]	Watney:	145	holes	today.	357	total.
[17:31]	JPL:	We	thought	you'd	have	more	done	by now.
.....
Anyway,	I'm	still	bored	at	night.	I	guess	that's	a	good	thing.	Nothing's wrong	with	the	Hab,	there's	a	plan	to	save	me,	and	the	physical	labor	is making	me	sleep	wonderfully.
I	miss	tending	the	potatoes.	The	Hab	isn't	the	same	without	them.
There's	still	soil	everywhere.	No	point	in	lugging	it	back	outside. Lacking	anything	better	to	do,	I	ran	some	tests	on	it.	Amazingly,	some	of the	bacteria	survived.	The	population	is	strong	and	growing.	That's	pretty impressive,	when	you	consider	it	was	exposed	to	near-vacuum	and	subarctic	temperatures	for	over	24	hours.
My	guess	is	pockets	of	ice	formed	around	some	of	the	bacteria, leaving	a	bubble	of	survivable	pressure	inside,	and	the	cold	wasn't	quite enough	to	kill	them.	With	hundreds	of	millions	of	bacteria,	it	only	takes one	survivor	to	stave	off	extinction.
Life	is	amazingly	tenacious.	They	don't	want	to	die	anymore	than	I do.
LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	196
I	....	up.
I	....	up	big	time.	I	made	a	mistake	that	might	kill	me.
I	started	my	EVA	around	08:45,	same	as	always.	I	got	my	hammer and	screwdriver	and	started	chipping	the	trailer's	hull.	It's	a	pain	in	the ass	to	make	a	chip	before	each	drilling,	so	I	make	all	the	day's	chips	in	a single	go.
After	chipping	out	150	divots	(hey,	I'm	an	optimist),	I	got	to	work.
It	was	the	same	as	yesterday	and	the	day	before.	Drill	through, relocate.	Drill	through,	relocate.	Drill	through	a	third	time,	then	set	the drill	aside	to	cool.	Repeat	that	process	over	and	over	till	lunchtime.
At	12:00,	I	took	a	break.	Back	in	the	Hab,	I	enjoyed	a	nice	lunch	and played	some	chess	against	the	computer	(it	kicked	my	ass).	Then	back	out for	the	day's	second	EVA.
At	13:30	my	ruination	occurred,	though	I	didn't	realize	it	at	the	time.
The	worst	moments	in	life	are	heralded	by	small	observations.	The tiny	lump	on	your	side	that	wasn't	there	before.	Coming	home	to	your wife	and	seeing	two	wine	glasses	in	the	sink.	Any	time	you	hear	“We interrupt	this	program...”
For	me,	it	was	when	the	drill	didn't	start.
Only	three	minutes	earlier,	it	was	working	fine.	I	had	finished	a	hole and	set	the	drill	aside	to	cool.	Same	as	always.
But	when	I	tried	to	get	back	to	work,	it	didn't	work.	The	power	light wouldn't	even	come	on.
I	wasn't	worried.	If	all	else	failed,	I	had	another	drill.	It	would	take	a
few	hours	to	wire	it	up,	but	that's	hardly	a	concern.
The	power	light	being	off	meant	there	was	probably	something	wrong with	the	line.	A	quick	glance	at	the	airlock	window	showed	the	lights were	on	in	the	Hab.	So	there	were	no	systemic	power	problems.	I	checked my	new	breakers	and	sure	enough,	all	three	had	tripped.
I	guess	the	drill	pulled	a	little	too	much	amperage.	No	big	deal.	I	reset the	breakers	and	got	back	to	work.	The	drill	fired	right	up,	and	I	was	back to	making	holes.
Doesn't	seem	like	a	big	deal,	right?	I	certainly	didn't	think	so	at	the time.
I	finished	my	day	at	17:00	after	drilling	131	holes.	Not	as	good	as yesterday,	but	I	lost	some	time	to	the	drill	malfunction. I	reported	my	progress.

[17:08]	Watney:	131	holes	today.	488	total.
Minor	drill	issue;	it	tripped	the	breakers.	There may	be	an	intermittent	short	in	the	drill, probably	in	the	attachment	point	of	the	power line.	Might	need	to	redo	it.

Earth	an	Mars	are	just	over	18	light-minutes	apart	now.	Usually, NASA	responded	within	25	minutes.	But	this	time,	no	reply	came. Remember,	I	do	all	my	communication	from	Rover	2,	which	relays everything	through	Pathfinder.	I	can't	just	lounge	in	the	Hab	awaiting	a reply;	I	have	to	stay	in	the	rover	until	they	acknowledge	the	message.

[17:38]	Watney:	Have	received	no	reply.	Last message	sent	30	minutes	ago.	Please	acknowledge.

I	waited	another	30	minutes.	Still	no	reply.	Fear	started	to	take	root.
Back	when	JPL's	Nerd	Brigade	hacked	the	rover	and	Pathfinder	to	be an	poor-man's	IM	client,	they	sent	me	a	cheat	sheet	for	troubleshooting.	I executed	the	first	instruction:

[18:09]	Watney:	system_command:	STATUS [18:09]	SYSTEM:	Last	message	sent	00h31m	ago.
Last	message	received	26h17m	ago.	Last	ping	reply from	probe	received	04h24m	ago.	WARNING:	52 unanswered	pings.

Pathfinder	was	no	longer	talking	to	the	rover.	It	had	stopped answering	pings	4	hours	and	24	minutes	ago.	Some	quick	math	told	me that	was	around	13:30	today.
The	same	time	the	drill	died.
I	tried	not	to	panic.	The	troubleshooting	sheet	has	a	list	of	things	to try	if	communication	is	lost.	They	are	(in	order):

1.	Confirm	power	still	flowing	to	Pathfinder.
2.	Reboot	rover.
3.	Reboot	Pathfinder	by	disconnecting/reconnecting	power.
4.	Install	rover's	comm	software	on	the	other	rover's	computer,	tryfrom	there.
5.	If	both	rovers	fail,	problem	is	likely	with	Pathfinder.	Checkconnections	very	closely.	Clean	Pathfinder	of	Martian	dust.
6.	Spell	message	in	Morse	Code	with	rocks,	include	things	attempted.Problem	may	be	recoverable	with	remote	update	of	Pathfinder.

I	only	got	as	far	as	step	1.	I	checked	Pathfinder's	connections	and	the negative	lead	was	no	longer	attached.
I	was	elated!	What	a	relief!	With	a	smile	on	my	face,	I	fetched	my electronics	kit	and	prepared	to	reattach	the	lead.	I	pulled	it	out	of	the probe	to	give	it	a	good	cleaning	(as	best	I	can	with	the	gloves	of	my	space suit)	and	noticed	something	strange.	The	insulation	had	melted.
I	pondered	this	development.	Melted	insulation	usually	means	a	short. More	current	than	the	wire	could	handle	had	passed	through.	But	the	bare portion	of	the	wire	wasn't	black	or	even	singed,	and	the	positive	lead's insulation	wasn't	melted	at	all.
Then,	one	by	one,	the	horrible	realities	of	Mars	came	in	to	play.	The
wire	wouldn't	be	burnt	or	singed.	That's	a	result	of	oxidization.	And there's	no	oxygen	in	the	air.	There	likely	was	a	short	after	all.	But	with the	positive	lead	being	unaffected,	the	power	must	have	come	from somewhere	else...
And	the	drill's	breaker	tripped	around	the	same	time...
Oh...	shit...
The	internal	electronics	for	Pathfinder	included	a	ground	lead	to	the hull.	This	way	it	could	not	build	up	a	static	charge	in	Martian	weather conditions	(no	water	and	frequent	sandblasting	can	make	impressive static	charge).
The	hull	sat	on	Panel	A,	one	of	four	sides	of	the	tetrahedron	which brought	Pathfinder	the	Mars.	The	other	3	sides	are	still	in	Ares	Vallis where	I	left	them.
Between	Panel	A	and	the	workbench	were	the	Mylar	balloons Pathfinder	had	used	to	tumble-land.	I	had	shredded	many	of	them	to transport	it.	Still,	a	lot	of	material	remained;	enough	to	reach	around Panel	A	and	be	in	contact	with	the	hull.	I	should	mention	that	Mylar	is conductive.
At	13:30,	I	leaned	the	drill	against	the	workbench.	The	drill's	cowling was	off	to	make	room	for	the	power	line.	The	workbench	is	metal.	If	the drill	leaned	against	the	workbench	just	right,	it	could	make	a	metal-tometal	connection.
And	that's	exactly	what	happened.
Power	traveled	from	the	drill	line's	positive,	through	the	workbench, through	the	Mylar,	through	Pathfinder's	hull,	through	a	bunch	of extremely	sensitive	and	irreplaceable	electronics,	and	out	the	negative lead	of	Pathfinder's	power	line.
Pathfinder	operates	on	50	milliamps.	It	got	nine	thousand	milliamps, which	plowed	through	the	delicate	electronics,	frying	everything	along the	way.	The	breakers	tripped,	but	it	was	too	late.
Pathfinder's	dead.	I've	lost	the	ability	to	contact	Earth. I'm	on	my	own.


Chapter	18
LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	197
Sigh...
Just	once	I'd	like	something	to	go	to	plan,	ya	know?
Mars	keeps	trying	to	kill	me.
Well...	Mars	didn't	electrocute	Pathfinder.	So	I'll	amend	that:
Mars	and	my	stupidity	keep	trying	to	kill	me.
Ok,	enough	self-pity.	I'm	not	doomed.	Things	will	be	just	be	harder than	planned.	I	have	all	I	need	to	survive.	And	Hermes	is	still	on	the	way. I	spelled	out	a	Morse	Code	message	using	rocks.	“PATHFINDER
FRIED	WITH	9AMPS.	DEAD	FOREVER.	PLAN	UNCHANGED.	WILL GET	TO	MAV.”
If	I	can	get	to	the	Ares-4	MAV,	I'll	be	set.	But	having	lost	contact with	NASA,	I	have	to	design	my	own	Great	Martian	Winnebago.
For	the	time	being,	I've	stopped	all	work	on	it.	I	don't	want	to continue	without	a	plan.	I'm	sure	NASA	had	all	kinds	of	ideas,	but	now	I have	to	come	up	with	one	on	my	own.
As	I	mentioned,	the	Big	Three	(Atmospheric	Regulator,	Oxygenator, and	Water	Reclaimer)	are	critical	components.	I	worked	around	them	for my	trip	to	Pathfinder.	I	used	CO2	filters	to	regulate	the	atmosphere,	and brought	enough	oxygen	and	water	for	the	whole	trip.	That	won't	work	this time.	I	need	the	Big	Three.
Problem	is,	they	soak	up	a	lot	of	power,	and	have	to	run	all	day	long. The	rover	batteries	have	18kwh	of	juice.	The	Oxygenator	alone	uses 44.1kwh	per	sol.	See	my	problem?
You	know	what?	“Kilowatt-hours	per	sol”	is	a	pain	in	the	ass	to	say. I'm	gonna	invent	a	new	scientific	unit	name.	One	kilowatt-hour	per	sol is...	it	can	be	anything...	um...	I	suck	at	this...	oh	....	it.	I'll	call	it	a
“pirate-ninja.”
All	told,	the	Big	Three	need	69.2pn,	most	of	that	going	to	the
Oxygenator	and	Atmospheric	Regulator.	(The	Water	Reclaimer	only needs	3.6	of	that.)
There'll	be	cutbacks.
The	easiest	one	is	the	Water	Reclaimer.	I	have	620L	of	water	(I	had	a lot	more	before	the	Hab	blew	up).	I	only	need	three	liters	of	water	per	sol, so	my	supply	will	last	206	sols.	There's	only	100	sols	after	I	leave	and before	I'm	picked	up	(or	die	in	the	attempt).
Conclusion:	I	don't	need	the	Water	Reclaimer	at	all.	I'll	drink	as needed,	and	dump	my	waste	outdoors.	Yeah,	that's	right	Mars,	I'm	gonna piss	and	shit	on	you.	That's	what	you	get	for	trying	to	kill	me	all	the	time. There.	I	saved	myself	3.6	pirate-ninjas.


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	198

I've	had	a	breakthrough	with	the	Oxygenator!
I	spent	most	of	the	day	looking	at	the	specs.	It	heats	CO2	to	900C, then	passes	it	over	a	zirconia	electrolysis	cell	to	yank	the	carbon	atoms off.	Heating	the	gas	is	what	takes	most	of	the	energy.	Why	is	that important?	Because	I'm	just	one	guy	and	the	Oxygenator	was	made	for six.	1/6th	the	quantity	of	CO2	means	1/6th	the	energy	to	heat	it.
The	spec	said	44.1pn,	but	all	this	time	it's	only	been	using	7.35 because	of	the	reduced	load.	Now	we're	getting	somewhere!
Then	there's	the	matter	of	the	Atmospheric	Regulator.	The	regulator samples	the	air,	figures	out	what's	wrong	with	it,	and	corrects	the problem.	Too	much	CO2?	Take	it	out.	Not	enough	O2?	Add	some. Without	it,	the	Oxygenator	is	worthless.	The	CO2	needs	to	be	separated in	order	to	be	processed.
The	regulator	analyzes	the	air	with	spectroscopy,	then	separates	the gasses	by	supercooling	them.	Different	elements	turn	to	liquid	at different	temperatures.	On	Earth,	supercooling	this	much	air	would	take ridiculous	amounts	of	energy.	But	(as	I'm	acutely	aware)	this	isn't	Earth.
Supercooling	is	done	by	pumping	air	to	a	component	outside	the	Hab. The	air	quickly	cools	to	the	outdoor	temperature,	which	ranges	from	-
150C	to	0C.	When	it's	warm,	additional	refrigeration	is	used,	but	cold days	can	turn	air	to	liquid	for	free.	The	real	energy	cost	comes	from heating	it	back	up.	If	it	came	back	to	the	Hab	unheated,	I'd	freeze	to death.
“But	wait!”	You're	thinking,	“Mars's	atmosphere	isn't	liquid.	Why does	the	Hab's	air	condense?”
The	Hab's	atmosphere	is	90	times	as	dense,	so	it	turns	to	liquid	at much	higher	temperatures.	The	regulator	gets	the	best	of	both	worlds. Literally.	Side	note:	Mars's	atmosphere	does	condense	at	the	poles.	In fact,	it	solidifies	into	dry	ice.
Problem:	the	regulator	takes	21.5pn.	Even	adding	some	of	the	Hab's power	cells	would	barely	power	the	regulator	for	a	sol,	let	alone	have juice	to	drive.
More	thinking	is	required.


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	199

I've	got	it.	I	know	how	to	power	the	Oxygenator	and	Atmospheric Regulator.
The	problem	with	small	pressure	vessels	is	CO2	toxicity.	You	can have	all	the	oxygen	in	the	world,	but	once	the	CO2	gets	above	1%	you'll start	to	get	drowsy.	At	2%	it's	like	being	drunk.	At	5%,	it's	hard	to	stay conscious.	8%	will	eventually	kill	you.	Keeping	alive	isn't	about	oxygen, it's	about	getting	rid	of	CO2.
I	need	the	regulator.	But	I	don't	need	the	Oxygenator	all	the	time.	I just	need	to	get	CO2	out	of	the	air,	and	back-fill	with	oxygen.	I	have	50 liters	of	liquid	oxygen	in	two	25L	tanks	here	in	the	Hab.	That's	50,000L in	gaseous	form,	enough	to	last	85	days.	Not	enough	to	see	me	through	to rescue,	but	a	hell	of	a	lot.
The	regulator	can	separate	the	CO2	and	store	it	in	a	tank,	adding oxygen	to	my	air	as	needed.	When	I	run	low	on	oxygen,	I	can	camp	out for	a	day	and	use	all	my	power	to	run	the	Oxygenator.	That	way,	the Oxygenator's	power	consumption	doesn't	eat	up	my	driving	juice.
So	I'll	run	the	regulator	all	the	time,	but	only	run	the	Oxygenator	on
days	I	dedicate	to	using	it.
After	the	regulator	freezes	the	CO2	out,	the	oxygen	and	nitrogen	are still	gasses,	but	they're	-75C.	If	the	regulator	fed	that	back	to	my	air without	reheating	it,	I'd	be	a	Popsicle	within	hours.	Most	of	the regulator's	power	goes	to	heating	the	return	air	so	that	doesn't	happen.
But	I	have	a	better	way	to	heat	it	up.	Something	NASA	wouldn't consider	on	their	most	homicidal	day.
The	RTG!
Yes,	the	RTG.	You	may	remember	it	from	my	exciting	trip	to Pathfinder.	A	lovely	lump	of	Plutonium	so	radioactive	it	gives	off	1500 watts	of	heat	which	it	uses	to	harvest	100W	of	electricity.	So	what happens	to	the	other	1400W?	It	gets	radiated	out	as	heat.
On	the	trip	to	Pathfinder,	I	had	to	actually	remove	insulation	from	the rover	to	vent	excess	heat	from	the	damn	thing.
I	ran	the	numbers.	The	regulator	uses	790W	to	constantly	reheat	air. The	RTG's	1400W	is	more	than	equal	to	the	task,	as	well	as	keeping	the rover	a	reasonable	temperature.
To	test,	I	shut	down	the	heaters	in	the	regulator	and	noted	its	power consumption.	After	a	few	minutes	I	turned	them	right	back	on	again.
Jesus	Christ	that	return	air	was	cold.	But	I	got	the	data	I	wanted.
With	heating,	the	regulator	needs	21.5pn.	Without	it...	(drum	roll) 1pn.	That's	right,	almost	all	of	the	power	was	going	to	heat.
As	with	most	of	life's	problems,	this	one	can	be	solved	by	a	box	of pure	radiation.
I	spent	the	rest	of	the	day	double-checking	my	numbers	and	running more	tests.	It	all	checks	out.	I	can	do	this.


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	200

I	hauled	rocks	today.
I	needed	to	know	what	kind	of	power	efficiency	the	rover/trailer	will get.	On	the	way	to	Pathfinder,	I	got	80km	from	18kwh.	This	time,	the load	will	be	a	lot	heavier.	I'll	be	towing	the	trailer	and	all	the	other	shit.
I	backed	the	rover	up	to	the	trailer	and	attached	the	tow	clamps.	Easy enough.
The	trailer	has	been	depressurized	for	some	time	now	(there's	a couple	of	hundred	little	holes	in	it,	after	all),	so	I	opened	both	airlock doors	to	have	a	straight	shot	at	the	interior.	Then	I	threw	a	bunch	of	rocks in.
I	had	to	guess	at	the	weight.	The	heaviest	thing	I'll	bring	with	me	is the	water.	620kg	worth.	My	freeze-dried	potatoes	will	add	another	200kg. I'll	probably	have	more	solar	cells	than	before,	and	maybe	a	battery	from the	Hab.	Plus	the	Atmospheric	Regulator	and	Oxygenator,	of	course.
Rather	than	weigh	all	that	shit,	I	took	a	guess	and	called	it	1200kg.
Half	a	cubic	meter	of	basalt	weighs	about	that	much	(more	or	less). After	two	hours	of	brutal	labor,	during	which	I	whined	a	lot,	I	got	it	all loaded	in.
Then,	with	both	batteries	fully	charged,	I	drove	circles	around	the	Hab until	I	drained	them	both.
With	a	blistering	top	speed	of	25kph,	it's	not	an	action-packed	thrill ride.	But	I	was	impressed	it	could	maintain	that	speed	with	all	the	extra weight.	The	rover	has	spectacular	torque.
But	physical	law	is	a	pushy	little	shit,	and	it	exacted	revenge	for	the additional	weight.	I	only	got	57km	before	I	was	out	of	juice.
That	was	57km	on	level	ground,	without	having	to	power	the regulator	(which	won't	take	much	with	the	heater	off).	Call	it	50km	per day	to	be	safe.	At	that	rate	it	would	take	65	days	to	get	to	Schiaparelli.
But	that's	just	the	travel	time.
Every	now	and	then,	I'll	need	to	break	for	a	day	and	let	the Oxygenator	use	all	the	power.	How	often?	After	a	bunch	of	math	I worked	out	that	my	18pn	budget	can	power	the	Oxygenator	enough	to make	2.5	sols	of	O2.	I'd	have	to	stop	every	two	to	three	sols	to	reclaim oxygen.	My	65	sol	trip	would	become	91!
That's	too	....	long.	I'll	tear	my	own	head	off	if	I	have	to	live	in the	rover	that	long.	Anyway,	I'm	exhausted	from	lifting	rocks	and whining	about	lifting	rocks.	I	think	I	pulled	something	in	my	back.	Gonna take	it	easy	the	rest	of	today.


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	201

Yeah,	I	definitely	pulled	something	in	my	back.	I	woke	up	in	agony.
So	I	took	a	break	from	rover	planning.	Instead,	I	spent	the	day	taking drugs	and	playing	with	radiation.
First,	I	loaded	up	on	Vicodin	for	my	back.	Hooray	for	Beck's	medical supplies!
Then	I	drove	out	to	the	RTG.	It	was	right	where	I	left	it,	in	a	hole	4km away.	Only	an	idiot	would	keep	that	thing	near	the	Hab.	So	anyway,	I brought	it	back	to	the	Hab.
Either	it'll	kill	me	or	it	won't.	A	lot	of	work	went	in	to	making	sure	it doesn't	break.	If	I	can't	trust	NASA,	who	can	I	trust?	(For	now	I'll	forget that	NASA	told	us	to	bury	it	far	away.)
I	stored	it	on	the	roof	of	the	rover	for	the	trip	back.	That	puppy	really spews	heat.
I	have	some	flexible	plastic	tubing	intended	for	minor	Water
Reclaimer	repairs.	After	bringing	the	RTG	in	to	the	Hab,	I	very	carefully glued	some	tubing	around	the	heat	baffles.	Using	a	funnel	made	from	a piece	of	paper,	I	ran	water	through	the	tubing,	letting	it	drain	in	to	a sample	container.
Sure	enough,	the	water	heated	up.	That's	not	really	a	surprise,	but	it's nice	to	see	thermodynamics	being	well-behaved.
The	Atmospheric	Regulator	doesn't	run	constantly.	The	freezeseparation	speed	is	driven	by	the	weather	outside.	So	the	returning	frigid air	doesn't	come	as	a	steady	flow.	And	the	RTG	generates	a	constant, predictable	heat.	It	can't	“ramp	up”	its	output.
So	I'll	heat	water	with	the	RTG	to	create	a	heat	reservoir,	then	I'll make	the	return	air	bubble	through	it.	That	way	I	don't	have	to	worry about	when	the	air	comes	in.	And	I	won't	have	to	deal	with	sudden temperature	changes	in	the	rover.
When	the	Vicodin	wore	off,	my	back	hurt	even	more	than	before.	I'm going	to	need	to	take	it	easy.	I	can't	just	pop	pills	forever.	So	I'm	taking	a few	days	off	from	heavy	labor.	To	that	end,	I	made	a	little	invention	just for	me...
I	took	Johanssen's	cot	and	cut	out	the	hammock.	Then	I	draped	spare Hab	canvas	over	the	frame,	making	a	pit	inside	the	cot,	with	extra canvass	around	the	edges.	Weighing	down	the	excess	canvass	with	rocks, I	now	had	a	water-tight	bathtub!
It	only	took	100L	to	fill	the	shallow	tub.
Then,	I	stole	the	pump	from	the	Water	Reclaimer.	(I	can	go	quite	a while	without	the	Water	Reclaimer	operating).	Hooking	it	up	to	my	RTGwater-heater,	I	put	both	the	input	and	output	lines	in	the	tub.
Yes,	I	know	this	is	ridiculous,	but	I	hadn't	had	a	bath	since	Earth,	and my	back	hurts.	Besides,	I'm	going	to	spend	100	sols	with	the	RTG anyway.	A	few	more	won't	hurt.	That's	my	bullshit	rationalization	and	I'm sticking	with	it.
It	took	two	hours	to	heat	the	water	to	37C.	Once	it	did,	I	shut	off	the pump,	and	got	in.	Oh	man,	all	I	can	say	is	“Ahhhhhh.” Why	the	hell	didn't	I	think	of	this	before?


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	207

I	spent	the	last	week	recovering	from	back	problems.	The	pain	wasn't bad,	but	there	aren't	any	chiropractors	on	Mars,	so	I	wasn't	taking chances.
I	took	hot	baths	twice	a	day,	laid	in	my	bunk	a	lot,	and	watched	shitty '70's	TV.	I've	already	seen	Lewis's	entire	collection,	but	I	didn't	have much	else	to	do.	I	was	reduced	to	watching	reruns.
I	got	a	lot	of	thinking	done.
I	can	make	everything	better	by	having	more	solar	panels.	The	14 panels	I	took	to	Pathfinder	provided	the	18kwh	that	the	batteries	could store.	When	traveling,	I	stowed	the	panels	on	the	roof.	The	trailer	gives me	room	to	store	another	7	(half	of	its	roof	will	be	missing	because	of	the hole	I'm	cutting	in	it).
This	trip's	power	needs	will	be	driven	by	the	Oxygenator.	It	all	comes down	to	how	much	power	I	can	give	that	greedy	little	....	in	a	single sol.	I	want	to	minimize	how	often	I	have	days	with	no	travel.	The	more juice
I	can	give	the	Oxygenator,	the	more	oxygen	it'll	liberate,	and	the longer
I	can	go	between	those	“air-sols.”
Let's	get	greedy.	Lets	say	I	can	find	a	home	for	14	more	panels instead	of	7.	Not	sure	how	to	do	that,	but	let's	say	I	can.	That	would	give me	38pn	to	work	with,	which	would	net	me	5.1	sols	of	oxygen	per	air-sol. I'd	only	have	to	stop	once	per	five	sols.	That's	much	more	reasonable.
Plus,	if	I	can	arrange	battery	storage	for	the	extra	power,	I	could	drive 100km	per	sol!	Easier	said	than	done,	though.	That	extra	18kwh	of storage	will	be	tough.	I'll	have	to	take	2	of	the	Hab's	9kwh	fuel	cells	and load	them	on	to	the	rover	or	trailer.	They	aren't	like	the	rover's	batteries; they're	not	small	or	portable.	They're	light	enough,	but	they're	pretty	big. I	may	have	to	attach	them	to	the	outside	hull,	and	that	would	eat	in	to	my solar	cell	storage.
100km	per	sol,	stopping	every	fifth	sol	to	reclaim	oxygen.	If	I	could pull	that	off,	I'd	get	there	40	sols.	That	would	be	sweet!
In	other	news,	It	occurred	to	me	that	NASA	is	probably	shitting bricks.	They're	watching	me	with	satellites,	and	haven't	seen	me	come	out of	the	Hab	for	six	days.	With	my	back	better,	it	was	time	to	drop	them	a line.
I	headed	out	for	an	EVA.	This	time,	being	very	careful	while	lugging rocks	around,	I	spelled	out	a	Morse	code		message:	“INJURED	BACK.
BETTER	NOW.		CONTINUING	ROVER	MODS.”
That	was	enough	physical	labor	for	today.	I	don't	want	to	overdo	it.
Think	I'll	have	a	bath.
LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	208
Today,	it	was	time	to	experiment	with	the	panels.
First,	I	put	the	Hab	on	low	power	mode:	No	internal	lights,	all nonessential	systems	offline,	all	internal	heating	suspended.	I'd	be outside	most	of	the	day	anyway.
I	detached	28	panels	from	the	solar	farm	and	dragged	them	to	the rover.	I	spent	four	hours	stacking	them	this	way	and	that.	The	poor	rover looked	like	the	Beverly	Hillbillies	truck.	Nothing	I	did	worked.
The	only	way	to	get	all	28	on	the	roof	was	to	make	stacks	so	high they'd	fall	off	the	first	time	I	turned.	If	I	lashed	them	together,	they'd	fall off	as	a	unit.	If	I	found	a	way	to	attach	them	perfectly	to	the	rover,	the rover	would	tip.	I	didn't	even	bother	to	test.	It	was	obvious	by	looking	and I	didn't	want	to	break	shit.
I	haven't	removed	the	chunk	of	hull	from	the	trailer	yet.	Half	the holes	are	drilled,	but	I'm	not	committed	to	anything.	If	I	left	it	in	place,	I could	have	four	stacks	of	seven	cells.	That	would	work	fine;	it's	just	two rovers	worth	of	what	I	did	for	the	trip	to	Pathfinder.
Problem	is,	I	need	that	opening.	The	regulator	has	to	be	in	the pressurized	area	and	it's	too	big	to	fit	in	the	rover.	Plus	which,	the Oxygenator	needs	to	be	in	a	pressurized	area	while	operating.	I'll	only need	it	every	5	sols,	but	what	would	I	do	on	that	sol?	No,	the	hole	has	to be	there.
As	it	is,	I'll	be	able	to	stow	21	panels.	I	need	homes	for	the	other seven.	There's	only	one	place	they	can	go:	The	sides	of	the	rover	and trailer.
One	of	my	earlier	modifications	was	“saddlebags”	draped	over	the rover.	One	side	held	the	extra	battery	(stolen	from	what	is	now	the	trailer) while	the	other	side	was	full	of	rocks	as	counterweight.
I	won't	need	them	this	time	around.	I	can	return	the	second	battery	to the	trailer	whence	it	came.	In	fact,	it'll	save	me	the	hassle	of	the	middrive	EVA	I	had	to	do	every	day	to	swap	cables.	When	the	rovers	are linked	up,	they	share	resources	including	electricity.
I	went	ahead	and	reinstalled	the	trailer's	battery.	It	took	me	two	hours but	it's	out	of	the	way	now.	I	removed	the	saddlebags	and	set	them	aside. They	may	be	handy	down	the	line.	If	I've	learned	one	thing	from	my	stay at	Club	Mars,	it's	that	everything	can	be	useful.
I	had	liberated	the	sides	of	the	rover	and	trailer.	After	staring	at	them for	a	while,	I	had	my	solution.
I'll	make	L-brackets	that	stick	out	from	the	undercarriages,	with	the
hooks	facing	up.	Two	brackets	per	side	to	make	a	shelf.	I	could	set	panels on	the	shelves	and	lean	them	against	the	rover.	Then	I'd	lash	them	to	the hull	with	homemade	rope.
There'll	be	four	“shelves”	total;	two	on	the	rover	and	two	on	the trailer.	If	the	brackets	stick	out	far	enough	to	accommodate	two	panels,	I could	store	8	additional	panels	that	way.	That	would	give	me	one	more panel	than	I'd	even	planned	for.
I'll	make	those	brackets	and	install	them	tomorrow.	I	would	have done	it	today,	but	it	got	dark	and	I	got	lazy.


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	209

Cold	night	last	night.	The	solar	cells	were	still	detached	from	the farm,	so	I	had	to	leave	the	Hab	in	low-power	mode.	I	did	turn	the	heat back	on	(I'm	not	insane),	but	I	set	the	internal	temperature	to	1C	to conserve	power.	Waking	up	to	frigid	weather	was	surprisingly	nostalgic.	I grew	up	in	Chicago,	after	all.
But	nostalgia	only	lasts	so	long.	I	vowed	to	complete	the	brackets today,	so	I	can	return	the	panels	to	the	farm.	Then	I	can	turn	the	damn heat	back	on.
I	headed	out	to	the	MAV's	landing	strut	array.	Most	of	the	MAV	was made	from	composite,	but	the	struts	had	to	absorb	the	shock	of	landing.
Metal	was	the	way	to	go.
Each	strut	is	2	meters	long,	and	held	together	by	bolts.	I	brought	them in	to	the	Hab	to	save	myself	the	hassle	of	working	in	an	EVA	suit.	I	took each	strut	apart,	yielding	a	bunch	of	metal	strips.
Shaping	the	brackets	involved	a	hammer	and...	well	that's	it,	actually.
Making	an	“L”	doesn't	take	a	lot	of	precision.
I	needed	holes	where	the	bolts	would	pass	through.	Fortunately,	my Pathfinder-murdering	drill	made	short	work	of	that	task.
Attaching	the	brackets	to	the	undercarriages	of	the	rover	and	trailer was	easy.	The	undercarriages	come	right	off.	I	bolted	the	brackets	in place	and	returned	the	undercarriages	where	they	belonged.	Important note	–	an	undercarriage	is	not	part	of	the	pressure	vessel.	The	holes	I drilled	won't	let	my	air	out.
I	tested	the	brackets	by	hitting	them	with	rocks.	This	kind	of sophistication	is	what	we	interplanetary	scientists	are	known	for.
After	convincing	myself	the	brackets	wouldn't	break	at	the	first	sign of	use,	I	tested	the	new	arrangement.	Two	stacks	of	seven	solar	cells	on the	rover;	another	seven	on	the	trailer,	then	two	per	shelf.	They	all	fit.
After	lashing	the	cells	in	place,	I	took	a	little	drive.	I	did	some	basic acceleration	and	deceleration,	turned	in	increasingly	tight	circles,	and even	did	a	power-stop.	The	cells	didn't	budge.
28	solar	cells,	baby!	And	room	for	one	extra!
After	some	well-earned	fist-pumping,	I	unloaded	the	cells	and dragged	them	back	to	the	farm.	No	Chicago	morning	for	me	tomorrow.
LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	211
I	am	smiling	a	great	smile.	The	smile	of	a	man	who	....	with	his car	and	didn't	break	it.	This	is	considerably	more	rare	than	you	might think.
I	spent	today	removing	unnecessary	crap	from	the	rover	and	trailer.	I was	pretty	damn	aggressive	about	it,	too.	Space	inside	the	pressure vessels	is	premium.	The	more	crap	I	clear	out	of	the	rover,	the	more space	there	is	for	me.	The	more	crap	I	clear	out	of	the	trailer,	the	more supplies	I	can	store	in	it,	and	the	less	I	have	to	store	in	the	rover.
First	off:	Each	vehicle	had	a	bench	for	passengers.	Bye!
Next:	there's	no	reason	for	the	trailer	to	have	life	support.	The	oxygen tanks,	nitrogen	tanks,	CO2	filter	assembly...	all	unnecessary.	It'll	be sharing	air	with	the	rover	(which	has	its	own	copy	of	each	of	those)	and it'll	be	carrying	the	regulator	and	Oxygenator.	Between	the	Hab components	it'll	be	carrying	and	the	rover,	there'll	be	two	redundant	life support	systems.	That's	plenty.
Then	I	yanked	the	driver's	seat	and	control	panel	out	of	the	trailer.
The	link-up	with	the	rover	is	physical.	The	trailer	doesn't	do	anything	but get	dragged	along	and	fed	air.	It	doesn't	need	controls	or	brains.	However, I	did	salvage	its	computer.	It's	small	and	light,	so	I'll	bring	it	with	me.	If something	goes	wrong	with	the	rover's	computer	en-route,	I'll	have	a spare.
The	trailer	had	tons	more	space	now.	It	was	time	for	experimentation.
The	Hab	has	twelve	9kwh	batteries.	They're	bulky	and	awkward.	Over two	meters	tall,	a	half-meter	wide,	and	3/4	meter	thick.	Making	them bigger	makes	them	take	less	mass	per	kwh	of	storage.	Yeah,	it's	counterintuitive.	But	once	NASA	figured	out	they	could	increase	volume	to decrease	mass	they	were	all	over	it.	Mass	is	the	expensive	part	about sending	shit	to	Mars.
I	detached	two	of	them.	The	Hab	mostly	uses	the	batteries	at	night.	As long	as	I	return	them	before	the	end	of	the	day,	things	should	be	fine.
With	both	of	the	trailer's	airlock	doors	open	I	was	able	to	get	the	first battery	in.	After	playing	real-life	Tetris	for	a	while	I	found	a	way	to	get the	first	battery	out	of	the	way	enough	to	let	the	second	battery	in.
Together,	they	eat	up	the	whole	front	half	of	the	trailer.	If	I	hadn't	cleared the	useless	shit	out	earlier	today,	I'd	never	have	gotten	them	both	in.
The	trailer's	battery	is	in	the	undercarriage,	but	the	main	power	line runs	through	the	pressure	vessel.	I	was	able	to	wire	the	Hab	batteries directly	in.	(No	small	feat	in	the	damn	EVA	suit).
A	system	check	from	the	rover	showed	I	had	done	the	wiring correctly.
This	may	all	seem	minor,	but	it's	awesome.	It	means	I	can	have	29 solar	cells	and	36kwh	of	storage.	I'll	be	able	to	do	my	100km	per	day after	all.
4	days	out	of	5,	anyway.

According	to	my	calender,	the	Hermes	resupply	probe	is	being launched	from	China	in	two	days	(if	there	were	no	delays).	If	that	screws up,	the	whole	crew	will	be	in	deep	shit.	I'm	more	nervous	about	that	than anything	else.
I've	been	in	mortal	danger	for	months;	I'm	kind	of	used	to	it	now.	But now	I'm	nervous	again.	Dying	would	suck,	but	my	crewmates	dying would	be	way	worse.	And	I	won't	find	out	how	the	launch	went	till	I	get to	Schiaparelli.
Good	luck,	guys.

	 
Chapter	19

“Hey,	Melissa...”	said	Robert.	“Am	I	getting	through?	Can	you	see me?”
“Loud	and	clear,	babe,”	said	Commander	Lewis.	“The	video	link	is solid.”
“They	say	I	have	5	minutes,”	Robert	said.
“Better	than	nothing,”	Lewis	said.	Floating	in	her	quarters,	she	gently touched	the	bulkhead	to	stop	drifting.	“It's	nice	to	see	you	in	real-time	for a	change.”
“Yeah,”	Robert	smiled.	“I	can	hardly	notice	the	delay.	I	gotta	say,	I wish	you	were	coming	home.”
Lewis	sighed,	“Me	too,	babe.”
“Don't	get	me	wrong,”	Robert	quickly	added,	“I	understand	why you're	doing	all	this.	Still,	from	a	selfish	point	of	view,	I	miss	my	wife.
Hey,	are	you	floating?”
“Huh?”	Lewis	said.	“Oh,	yeah.	The	ship	isn't	spinning	right	now.	No centripetal	gravity.”
“Why	not?”
“Because	we're	docking	with	the	Taiyang	Shen	in	a	few	days.	We can't	spin	while	we	dock	with	things.”
“I	see,”	said	Robert.	“So	how	are	things	up	on	the	ship?	Anyone giving	you	shit?”
“No,”	Lewis	shook	her	head.	“They're	a	good	crew;	I'm	lucky	to	have them.”
“Oh	hey!”	Robert	said.	“I	found	a	great	addition	to	our	collection!” “Oh?	What'd	you	get?”
“An	original	production	8-track	of	Abba's	Greatest	Hits.	Still	in	the original	packaging.”
Lewis	widened	her	eyes.	“Seriously?	A	1973	or	one	of	the	reprints?”
“1973	all	the	way.”
“Wow!	Good	find!”
“I	know,	right!?”


With	a	final	shudder,	the	jetliner	came	to	a	stop	at	the	gate.
“Oh	gods,”	said	Venkat,	massaging	his	neck.	“That	was	the	longest flight	I've	ever	been	on.”
“Mm,”	said	Teddy,	rubbing	his	eyes.
“At	least	we	don't	have	to	go	to	Jiuquan	till	tomorrow,”	Venkat moaned.	“14½	hours	of	flying	is	enough	for	one	day.”
“Don't	get	too	comfortable,”	Teddy	said.	“We	still	have	to	go	through customs	and	we'll	probably	have	to	fill	out	a	bunch	of	forms	because we're	U.S.	Government	officials...	it's	gonna	be	hours	before	we	sleep.”
“Craaaap.”
Gathering	their	carry-on	luggage,	they	trudged	off	the	plane	with	the rest	of	the	weary	travellers.
Beijing	Capital	International	Airport's	Terminal	3	echoed	with	the cacophony	common	to	huge	air	terminals.	Venkat	and	Teddy	continued forward	as	the	Chinese	citizens	from	their	flight	split	off	to	go	to	a simpler	point-of-entry	process.
As	Venkat	took	his	place	in	line,	Teddy	filed	in	behind	him	and scanned	the	terminal	for	a	convenience	store.	Any	form	of	caffeine	would be	welcome.
“Excuse	me,	gentlemen,”	came	a	voice	from	beside	them.
They	turned	to	see	a	young	Chinese	man	wearing	casual	attire.	“My name	is	Su	Bin	Bao,”	he	said	in	perfect	English.	“I	am	an	employee	of	the China	National	Space	Administration.	I	will	be	your	guide	and	translator during	your	stay	in	the	People's	Republic	of	China.”
“Nice	to	meet	you,	Mr.	Su,”	Teddy	said.	“I'm	Teddy	Sanders,	and	this is	Dr.	Venkat	Kapoor.”
“We	need	sleep,”	Venkat	said	immediately.	“Just	as	soon	as	we	get through	customs,	please	take	us	to	a	hotel	to	sleep.”
“I	can	do	better	than	that,	Dr.	Kapoor,”	Su	smiled.	“You	are	official guests	of	the	People's	Republic	of	China.	You	have	been	pre-authorized to	bypass	customs.	I	can	take	you	to	your	hotel	immediately.” “I	love	you,”	Venkat	said.
“Tell	the	People's	Republic	of	China	we	said	thanks,”	Teddy	added.
“I'll	pass	that	along,”	Su	Bin	smiled.


“Helena,	my	love,”	Vogel	said	to	his	wife.	“I	trust	you	are	well?” “Yes,”	she	said.	“I'm	fine.	But	I	do	miss	you.”
“Sorry.”
“Can't	be	helped,”	she	shrugged.
“How	are	our	monkeys?”
“The	children	are	fine,”	she	smiled.	“Eliza	is	adjusting	to	life	in junior	high,	and	Victor	is	goalkeeper	for	his	high	school's	team.”
“Excellent!”	Vogel	said.	“I	hear	you	are	at	Mission	Control.	Was
NASA	unable	to	pipe	the	signal	to	Bremen?”
“They	could	have,”	she	said.	“But	it	was	easier	for	them	to	bring	me	to Houston.	A	free	vacation	to	the	United	States.	Who	am	I	to	turn	that down?”
“Well	played.	And	how	is	my	mother?”
“As	well	as	can	be	expected,”	Helena	said.	“She	has	her	good	days and	bad	days.	My	last	few	visits,	she	didn't	recognize	me.	In	a	way,	it's	a blessing.	She	doesn't	have	to	worry	about	you	like	I	do.” “She	hasn't	worsened?”	He	asked.
“No,	she's	about	the	same	as	when	you	left.	The	doctors	are	sure	she'll still	be	here	when	you	return.”
“Good,”	he	said.	“I	was	worried	I'd	seen	her	for	the	last	time.”
“Alex,”	Helena	said,	“Will	you	be	safe?”
“As	safe	as	we	can	be,”	he	said.	“The	ship	is	in	perfect	condition,	and after	receiving	the	Taiyang	Shen,	we	will	have	all	the	supplies	we	need for	the	remainder	of	the	journey.” “Be	careful,”	She	said.
“I	will,	my	love,”	Vogel	promised.


“Welcome	to	Jiuquan,”	Guo	Ming	said.	“I	hope	your	flight	was smooth?”
Su	Bin	translated	Guo	Ming's	words	as	Teddy	took	the	second-best seat	in	the	observation	room.
“Yes,	thank	you,”	Teddy	said.	“The	hospitality	of	your	people	has been	wonderful.	The	private	jet	you	arranged	to	bring	us	here	was	a	nice touch.”
“My	people	have	enjoyed	working	with	your	advance	team,”	Guo Ming	said.	“The	last	month	has	been	very	interesting.	Attaching	an American	probe	to	a	Chinese	booster.	I	believe	this	is	the	first	time	it's ever	been	done.”
“It	just	goes	to	show,”	Teddy	said.	“Love	of	science	is	universal across	all	cultures.”
Guo	Ming	nodded.	“My	people	have	especially	commented	on	the work	ethic	of	your	man	Mitch	Henderson.	He	is	very	dedicated.” “He's	a	pain	in	the	ass,”	Teddy	said.
Su	Bin	paused	before	translating,	but	pressed	on.
Guo	Ming	laughed.	“You	can	say	that,”	he	said.	“I	cannot.”
“So	explain	it	again,”	Beck's	sister	Amy	said.	“Why	do	you	have	to	do an	EVA?”
“I	probably	don't,”	Beck	explained.	“I	just	need	to	be	ready	to.”
“Why?”
“In	case	the	probe	can't	dock	with	us.	If	something	goes	wrong,	it'll	be my	job	to	go	out	and	grab	it.”
“Can't	you	just	move	Hermes	to	dock	with	it?”
“No	way,”	Beck	said.	“Hermes	is	huge.	It's	not	made	for	fine maneuvering	control.”
“Why	does	it	have	to	be	you?”
“Cause	I'm	the	EVA	specialist.”
“But	I	thought	you	were	the	Doctor.”
“I	am,”	Beck	said.	“Everyone	has	multiple	roles.	I'm	the	doctor,	the biologist,	and	the	EVA	specialist.	Commander	Lewis	is	our	geologist.
Johanssen	is	the	sysop	and	reactor	tech.	And	so	on.”
“How	about	that	good	looking	guy...	Martinez?”	Amy	asked.	“What
does	he	do?”
“He	pilots	the	MDV	and	MAV.”	Beck	said.	“He's	also	married	with	a kid,	you	lecherous	homewrecker.”
“Ah	well.	How	about	Watney?	What	did	he	do?”
“He's	our	botanist	and	engineer.	And	don't	talk	about	him	in	the	past tense.”
“Engineer?	Like	Scotty?”
“Kind	of,”	Beck	said.	“He	fixes	stuff.”
“I	bet	that's	coming	in	handy	now.” “Yeah,	no	shit.”
“They're	a	weird	bunch,	these	Chinese	nerds,”	Mitch	said.	“But	they make	a	good	booster.”
“Good.”	Venkat	said.	“How's	the	linkage	between	the	booster	and	our probe?”
“It	all	checks	out,”	Mitch	said.	“JPL	followed	the	specs	perfectly.	It fits	like	a	glove.”
“Any	concerns	or	reservations?”	Venkat	asked.
“Yeah.	I'm	concerned	about	what	I	ate	last	night.	I	think	it	had	an eyeball	in	it.”
“I'm	sure	there	wasn't	an	eyeball.”
“The	engineers	here	made	it	for	me	special,”	Mitch	said.
“There	may	have	been	an	eyeball,”	Venkat	said.	“They	hate	you.”
“Why?”
“Cause	you're	a	....,	Mitch,”	Venkat	said.	“A	total	.....	To everyone.”
“Fair	enough.	So	long	as	the	probe	gets	to	Hermes,	they	can	burn	me in	....	effigy	for	all	I	care.”
“Wave	to	Daddy!”	Marissa	said,	waving	David's	hand	at	the	camera.
“Wave	to	Daddy!”
“He's	too	young	to	know	what's	going	on,”	Martinez	said.
“Just	think	of	the	playground	cred	he'll	have	later	in	life,”	she	said.
“'My	dad	went	to	Mars.	What's	your	dad	do?'” “Yes,	I'm	pretty	awesome,”	he	agreed.
Marissa	continued	to	wave	David's	hand	at	the	camera.	David	was more	interested	in	his	other	hand,	which	was	actively	engaged	in	picking his	nose.
“So,”	Martinez	said.	“You're	pissed.”
“You	can	tell?”	Marissa	asked.	“I	tried	to	hide	it.”
“We've	been	together	since	we	were	15.	I	know	when	you're	pissed.” “You	volunteered	to	extend	the	mission	533	days,”	she	said.
“Asshole.”
“Yeah,”	Martinez	said.	“I	figured	that'd	be	the	reason.”
“Your	son	will	be	in	kindergarten	when	you	get	back.	He	won't	have any	memories	of	you.”
“I	know,”	Martinez	said.
“I	have	to	wait	another	533	days	to	get	laid!” “So	do	I,”	he	said	defensively.
“I	have	to	worry	about	you	that	whole	time,”	she	added.
“Yeah,”	he	said.	“Sorry.”
She	took	a	deep	breath.	“We'll	get	past	it.” “We'll	get	past	it,”	he	agreed.


“Welcome	to	CNN's	Mark	Watney	Report.	Today	we	have	the Director	of	Mars	Operations	Venkat	Kapoor.	He's	speaking	to	us	live	via satellite	from	China.	Dr.	Kapoor,	thank	you	for	joining	us.” “Happy	to	do	it,”	Venkat	said.
“So	Dr.	Kapoor,	tell	us	about	the	Taiyang	Shen.	Why	go	to	China	to launch	a	probe?	Why	not	launch	it	from	the	US?”
“Hermes	isn't	going	to	orbit	Earth,”	Venkat	said.	“It's	just	passing	by on	its	way	to	Mars.	And	its	velocity	is	huge.	We	need	a	booster	capable of	not	only	escaping	Earth's	gravity,	but	matching	Hermes's	current velocity.	Only	the	Taiyang	Shen	has	enough	power	to	do	that.” “Tell	us	about	the	probe	itself.”
“It	was	a	rush	job,”	Venkat	said.	“JPL	only	had	30	days	to	put	it together.	They	had	to	be	as	safe	and	efficient	as	they	could.	It's	basically a	shell	full	of	food	and	other	supplies.	It	has	a	standard	satellite	thruster package	for	maneuvering,	but	that's	it.”
“And	that's	enough	to	fly	to	Hermes?”
“The	Taiyang	Shen	will	send	it	to	Hermes.	The	thrusters	are	for	fine control	and	docking.	And	JPL	didn't	have	time	to	make	a	guidance system.	So	it'll	be	remote-controlled	by	a	human	pilot.” “Who	will	be	controlling	it?”	Cathy	asked.
“The	Ares	3	pilot,	Major	Rick	Martinez.	As	the	probe	approaches
Hermes,	he'll	take	over	and	guide	it	to	the	docking	port.”
“And	what	if	there's	a	problem?”
“Hermes	will	have	their	EVA	specialist,	Dr.	Chris	Beck,	suited	up	and ready	the	whole	time.	If	necessary	he	will	literally	grab	the	probe	with	his hands	and	drag	it	to	the	docking	port.”
“Sounds	kind	of	unscientific,”	Cathy	laughed.
“You	want	unscientific?”	Venkat	smiled.	“If	the	probe	can't	attach	to the	docking	port	for	some	reason,	Beck	will	open	the	probe	and	carry	its contents	to	the	airlock.”
“Like	bringing	in	the	groceries?”	Cathy	asked.
“Exactly	like	that,”	Venkat	said.	“And	we	estimate	it	would	take	4 trips	back	and	forth.	But	that's	all	an	edge	case.	We	don't	anticipate	any problems	with	the	docking	process.”
“Sounds	like	you're	covering	all	your	bases,”	Cathy	smiled.
“We	have	to,”	Venkat	said.	“If	they	don't	get	those	supplies...	well, they	need	those	supplies.”
“Thanks	for	taking	the	time	to	answer	our	questions,”	Cathy	said. “Always	a	pleasure,	Cathy.”


He	fidgeted	in	the	chair,	unsure	what	to	say.	After	a	moment,	he pulled	a	handkerchief	from	his	pocket	and	mopped	sweat	from	his balding	head.
“What	if	the	probe	doesn't	get	to	you?”	He	asked.
“Try	not	to	think	about	that,”	Johanssen	said.
“Your	mother	is	so	worried	she	couldn't	even	come.” “I'm	sorry,”	Johanssen	mumbled,	looking	down.
“She	can't	eat,	she	can't	sleep,	she	feels	sick	all	the	time.	I'm	not much	better.	How	can	they	make	you	do	this?”
“They're	not	'making'	me	do	it,	Dad.	I	volunteered.” “Why	would	you	do	that	to	your	mother?”	He	demanded.
“Sorry,”	Johanssen	mumbled.	“Watney's	my	crewmate.	I	can't	just	let him	die.”
He	sighed.	“I	wish	we'd	raised	you	to	be	more	selfish.” She	chuckled	quietly.
“How	did	I	end	up	in	this	situation?”	He	lamented.	“I'm	the	district sales	manager	of	a	napkin	factory.	Why	is	my	daughter	in	space?” Johanssen	shrugged.
“You	were	always	scientifically	minded,”	he	said.	“It	was	great!
Straight-A	student.	Hanging	around	nerdy	guys	too	scared	to	try	anything.
No	wild	side	at	all.	You're	every	father's	dream	daughter.”
“Thanks,	Dad,	I-”
“But	then	you	got	on	a	giant	bomb	that	blasted	you	to	Mars.	And	I mean	that	literally.”
“Technically,”	she	corrected,	“the	booster	only	took	me	in	to	orbit.	It was	the	nuclear	powered	ion	engine	that	took	me	to	Mars.” “Oh,	much	better!”	He	said.
“Dad,	I'll	be	all	right.	Tell	Mom	I'll	be	all	right.”
“What	good	will	that	do?”	He	said.	“She's	going	to	be	tied	up	in	knots until	you're	back	home.”
“I	know,”	Johanssen	mumbled.	“But...”
“What?”	He	said.	“But	what?”
“I	won't	die.	I	really	won't.	Even	if	everything	goes	wrong.”
“What	do	you	mean?”
Johanssen	furrowed	her	brow.	“Just	tell	Mom	I	won't	die.”
“How?	I	don't	understand.”
“I	don't	want	to	get	in	to	the	how,”	Johanssen	said.
“Look,”	he	said,	leaning	toward	the	camera.	“I've	always	respected
your	privacy	and	independence.	I	never	tried	to	pry	in	to	your	life,	never tried	to	control	you.	I've	been	really	good	about	that,	right?” “Yeah,”	she	said.
“So	in	exchange	for	a	lifetime	of	staying	out	of	your	business,	let	me nose	in	just	this	once.	What	are	you	not	telling	me?”
She	fell	silent	for	several	seconds.	Finally,	she	said	“They	have	a plan.”
“Who?”
“There's	always	have	a	plan,”	she	said.	“They	work	out	everything	in advance.”
“What	plan?”
“They	picked	me	to	survive.	I'm	youngest.	I	have	the	skills	necessary to	get	home	alive.	And	I'm	the	smallest	and	need	the	least	food.”
“What	happens	if	the	probe	fails,	Beth,”	her	father	asked.	This	time, he	was	uncharacteristically	firm.
“Everyone	would	die	but	me,”	she	said.	“They'd	all	take	pills	and	die. They'll	do	it	right	away	so	they	don't	use	up	any	food.	Commander	Lewis picked	me	to	be	the	survivor.	She	told	me	about	it	yesterday.	I	don't	think
NASA	knows	about	it.”
“And	the	supplies	would	last	until	you	got	back	to	Earth?”
“No,”	she	said.	“We	have	enough	food	left	to	feed	six	people	for	a month.	If	I	was	the	only	one,	it	would	last	6	months.	With	a	reduced	diet	I could	stretch	it	to	9.	But	it'll	be	17	months	before	I	get	back.”
“So	how	would	you	survive?”
“The	supplies	wouldn't	be	the	only	source	of	food.”	she	said.
He	widened	his	eyes.	“Oh...	oh	my	god...”
“Just	tell	Mom	the	supplies	would	last,	ok?”


Taiyang	Shen's	con-trail	wafted	in	the	chilly	Gobi	sky.	The	ship,	no longer	visible	to	the	naked	eye,	pressed	onward	toward	orbit.	Its deafening	roar	dwindled	to	a	distant	rumbling	thunder.
“Perfect	launch,”	Venkat	said	enthusiastically.
“Of	course,”	said	Zhu	Tao.
“You	guys	really	came	through	for	us,”	Venkat	said.	“And	we're grateful!”
“Naturally.”
“And	hey,	you	guys	get	a	seat	on	Ares	5.	Everyone	wins.”
“Mmm.”
Venkat	looked	at	Zhu	Tao	sideways.	“You	don't	seem	too	happy.”
“I	spent	4	years	working	on	Taiyang	Shen,”	he	said.	“So	did	countless other	researchers,	scientists,	and	engineers.	Everyone	poured	their	souls in	to	construction	while	I	waged	a	constant	political	battle	to	maintain funding.
“In	the	end,	we	built	a	beautiful	probe.	The	largest,	sturdiest unmanned	probe	in	history.	And	now	it's	sitting	in	a	warehouse.	It'll	never fly.	The	State	Council	won't	fund	another	booster	like	that.”
He	turned	to	Venkat.	“It	could	have	been	a	lasting	legacy	of	scientific research.	Now	it's	a	delivery	run.	We'll	get	a	Chinese	astronaut	on	Mars, but	what	science	will	he	bring	back	that	some	other	astronaut	couldn't have?	This	operation	is	a	net	loss	for	mankind's	knowledge.”
“Well,”	Venkat	said	cautiously,	“It's	a	net	gain	for	Mark	Watney.” “Mmm,”	Zhu	Tao	said.


“Distance	61m,	velocity	2.3m/s,”	Johanssen	said.
“No	problem,”	Martinez	said,	his	eyes	glued	to	his	screens.	One showed	the	camera	feed	from	docking	port	A,	the	other	a	constant	feed	of the	probe's	telemetry.
Lewis	floated	behind	Johanssen	and	Martinez's	stations.
“Visual	contact,”	Beck's	voice	came	over	the	radio.	He	stood	in
Airlock	3	(via	magnetic	boots),	fully	suited	up	with	the	outer	door	open. The	bulky	SAFER	Unit	on	his	back	would	allow	him	free	motion	in	space should	the	need	arise.	An	attached	tether	led	to	a	spool	on	the	wall.
“Vogel,”	Lewis	said	in	to	her	headset.	“You	in	position?”
Vogel	stood	in	the	still-pressurized	Airlock	2,	suited	up	save	his helmet.	“Ja,	in	position	and	ready,”	he	replied.	He	was	the	emergency EVA	if	Beck	needed	rescue.
“All	right,	Martinez,”	Lewis	said.	“Bring	it	in.”
“Aye,	Commander.”
“Distance	43m,	velocity	2.3m/s.”	Johanssen	called	out.
“All	stats	nominal,”	Martinez	reported.
“Slight	rotation	in	the	probe,”	Johanssen	said.	“Relative	rotational velocity	is	0.05rps.”
“Anything	under	0.3	is	fine,”	Martinez	said.	“The	capture	system	can deal	with	it.”
“Probe	is	well	within	manual	recovery	range,”	Beck	reported.
“Copy,”	Lewis	said.
“Distance	22m,	velocity	2.3m/s.”	Johanssen	said.	“Angle	is	good.”
“Slowing	her	down	a	little,”	Martinez	said,	sending	instructions	to	the probe.
“Velocity	1.8...	1.3...”	Johanssen	reported.	“0.9...	stable	at	0.9m/s.” “Range?”	Martinez	asked.
“12m,”	Johanssen	replied.	“Velocity	steady	at	0.9m/s.”
“Angle?”
“Angle	is	good.”
“Then	we're	in	line	for	auto-capture,”	Martinez	said.	“Come	to	papa.”
The	probe	drifted	gently	to	the	docking	port.	Its	capture	boom,	a	long metal	triangle,	entered	the	port's	funnel,	scraping	slightly	along	the	edge. The	port	pulled	the	boom	in,	aligning	and	orienting	the	probe automatically.	After	several	loud	clanks	echoed	through	the	ship,	the computer	reported	success.
“Docking	complete,”	Martinez	said.
“Seal	is	tight,”	Johanssen	said.
“Beck,”	Lewis	said.	“Your	services	won't	be	needed.” “Roger	that,	commander,”	Beck	said.	“Closing	airlock.” “Vogel,	return	to	interior,”	she	ordered.
“Copy,	Commander,”	he	said.
“Airlock	pressure	to	100%”	Beck	reported.	“Re-entering	ship...	I'm back	in.”
“Also	inside,”	Vogel	said.
Lewis	pressed	a	button	on	her	headset.	“Houst-	er...	Jiuquan,	probe docking	complete.	No	complications.”
“Glad	to	hear	it,	Hermes,”	came	Mitch's	voice	over	the	comm.
“Report	status	of	all	supplies	once	you	get	them	aboard	and	inspected.” “Roger	Jiuquan,”	Lewis	said.
Taking	off	her	headset,	she	turned	to	Martinez	and	Johanssen.
“Unload	the	probe	and	stow	the	supplies.	I'm	going	to	help	Beck	and Vogel	de-suit.”

Martinez	and	Johanssen	floated	down	the	hall	toward	docking	port	A. “So,”	he	said,	“who	would	you	have	eaten	first?” She	glared	at	him.
“Cause	I	think	I'd	be	tastiest,”	he	continued,	flexing	his	arm.	“Look	at that.	Good	solid	muscle	there.”
“You're	not	funny.”
“I'm	free	range,	you	know.	Corn-fed.”
She	shook	her	head	and	accelerated	down	the	hall. “Come	on!	I	thought	you	liked	Mexican!” “Not	listening,”	she	called	back.










Chapter	20

LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	376

I'm	finally	done	with	the	rover	modifications!
The	hard	part	was	figuring	out	how	to	maintain	life	support.
Everything	else	was	just	hard	work.	A	lot	of	hard	work.
I	haven't	been	good	at	keeping	the	log	up	to	date,	so	here's	a	recap:
First	I	had	to	finish	drilling	holes	with	the	Pathfinder-murderin'	drill. Then	I	chiseled	out	a	billion	little	chunks	between	the	holes.	Ok,	it	was 749	but	it	felt	like	a	billion.
Then	I	had	one	big	hole	in	the	trailer.	I	filed	down	the	edges	to	keep them	from	being	too	sharp.
Remember	the	pop-tents?	I	cut	the	bottom	out	of	one	and	the remaining	canvas	was	the	right	size	and	shape.	I	used	seal-strips	to	attach it	to	the	inside	of	the	trailer.	After	pressurizing	and	sealing	up	leaks	as	I found	them,	I	had	a	nice	big	balloon	bulging	out	of	the	trailer.	The pressurized	area	is	easily	big	enough	to	fit	the	Oxygenator	and Atmospheric	Regulator.
The	regulator	has	an	external	component	imaginatively	named	the “Atmospheric	Regulator	External	Component.”	The	regulator	pumps	air to	the	AREC	to	let	Mars	freeze	it.	It	does	this	along	a	tube	that	runs through	a	valve	in	the	Hab's	wall.	The	return	air	comes	back	through another	tube	just	like	it.
Getting	the	tubing	through	the	balloon	canvas	wasn't	too	hard.	I	have several	spare	valve	patches.	Basically	they're	10x10cm	patches	of	Hab canvas	with	a	valve	in	the	middle.	Why	do	I	have	these?	Consider	what would	happen	on	a	normal	mission	if	the	regulator	valve	broke.	They'd have	to	scrub	the	whole	mission.	Easier	to	send	spares.
The	AREC	is	fairly	small.	I	made	a	shelf	for	it	just	under	the	solar panel	shelves.	The	tubing	and	shelf	are	ready	for	when	I	eventually	move the	AREC	over.
There's	still	a	lot	to	do.
I'm	not	in	any	hurry;	I've	been	taking	it	slow.	One	4-hour	EVA	per day	spent	on	work,	the	rest	of	the	time	to	relax	In	the	Hab.	Plus,	I'll	take	a day	off	every	now	and	then,	especially	if	my	back	hurts.	I	can't	afford	to injure	myself	now.
I'll	try	to	be	better	about	this	log.	Now	that	I	might	actually	get rescued,	people	will	probably	read	it.	I'll	be	more	diligent	and	log	every day.


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	380

I	finished	the	heat	reservoir.
Remember	my	experiments	with	the	RTG	and	having	a	hot	bath?
Same	principle,	but	I	came	up	with	an	improvement:	Submerge	the	RTG.
No	heat	will	be	wasted	that	way.
I	started	with	a	Large	Rigid	Sample	Container	(or	“plastic	box”	to people	who	don't	work	at	NASA).	I	ran	a	tube	through	the	open	top	and down	the	inside	wall.	Then	I	coiled	it	in	the	bottom	to	make	a	spiral.	I glued	it	in	place	like	that,	and	sealed	the	end.	Using	my	smallest	drill	bit, I	put	dozens	of	little	holes	in	the	coil.	The	idea	is	for	the	return	air	to	pass through	the	water	as	a	bunch	of	little	bubbles.	The	increased	surface	area will	get	the	heat	in	to	the	air	better.
Then	I	got	a	Medium	Flexible	Sample	Container	(“Ziploc	bag”)	and tried	to	seal	the	RTG	in	it.	But	the	RTG	has	an	irregular	shape,	and	I couldn't	get	all	the	air	out	of	the	bag.	I	can't	allow	any	air	in	there.	Instead of	heat	going	to	the	water,	some	would	get	stored	in	the	air,	which	could superheat	and	melt	the	bag.
I	tried	a	bunch	of	times,	but	there	was	always	an	air	pocket	I	couldn't get	out.	I	was	getting	pretty	frustrated	until	I	remembered	I	have	an airlock.
Suiting	up,	I	went	to	Airlock	2	and	depressurized	to	a	full	vacuum.	I plopped	the	RTG	in	the	bag	and	closed	it.	Perfect	vacuum	seal.
Next	came	some	testing.	I	put	the	bagged	RTG	at	the	bottom	of	the container	and	filled	it	with	water.	It	holds	20L,	and	the	RTG	quickly heated	it.	It	was	gaining	a	degree	per	minute.	I	let	it	go	until	it	was	a	good 40C.	Then	I	hooked	up	the	regulator's	return	air	line	to	my	contraption and	watched	the	results.
It	worked	great!	The	air	bubbled	through,	just	like	I'd	hoped.	Even better,	the	bubbles	agitated	the	water,	which	distributed	the	heat	evenly.
I	let	it	run	for	an	hour,	and	the	Hab	started	to	get	cold.	The	RTG's	heat can't	keep	up	with	the	total	loss	from	the	Hab's	impressive	surface	area. Not	a	problem.	I've	already	established	it's	plenty	to	keep	the	rover	warm.
I	reattached	the	return	air	line	to	the	regulator	and	things	got	back	to normal.


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	381

I've	been	thinking	about	laws	on	Mars.
Yeah,	I	know,	it's	a	stupid	thing	to	think	about,	but	I	have	a	lot	of	free time.
There's	an	international	treaty	saying	no	country	can	lay	claim	to anything	that's	not	on	Earth.	And	by	another	treaty,	if	you're	not	in	any country's	territory,	maritime	law	applies.
So	Mars	is	“international	waters.”
NASA	is	an	American	non-military	organization,	and	it	owns	the	Hab.
So	while	I'm	in	the	Hab,	American	law	applies.	As	soon	as	I	step	outside, I'm	in	international	waters.	Then	when	I	get	in	the	Rover,	I'm	back	to American	law.
Here's	the	cool	part:	I	will	eventually	go	to	Schiaparelli	crater	and commandeer	the	Ares	4	lander.	Nobody	explicitly	gave	me	permission	to do	this,	and	they	can't	until	I'm	aboard	Ares	4	and	operating	the	comm system.	After	I	board	Ares	4,	before	talking	to	NASA,	I	will	take	control of	a	craft	in	international	waters	without	permission.
That	makes	me	a	pirate!
A	Space	Pirate!


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	383

You	may	be	wondering	what	I	do	with	my	free	time.	I	spent	a	lot	of	it sitting	around	on	my	lazy	ass	watching	TV.	But	so	do	you,	so	don't	judge.
Also,	I	plan	my	trip.
Pathfinder	was	a	cake	run.	Flat,	level	ground	all	the	way.	The	only problem	was	navigating.	But	the	trip	to	Schiaparelli	will	mean	going	over massive	elevation	changes.
I	have	a	rough	satellite	map	of	the	whole	planet.	It	doesn't	have	much detail,	but	I'm	lucky	to	have	it	at	all.	NASA	didn't	expect	me	to	wander 3200km	from	the	Hab.
Acidalia	Planitia	(Where	I	am)	has	a	relatively	low	elevation.	So	does Schiaparelli.	But	between	them	it	goes	up	and	down	by	10km.	There's going	to	be	a	lot	of	dangerous	driving.
Things	will	be	smooth	while	I'm	in	Acidalia,	but	that's	only	the	first 650km.	After	that	comes	the	crater-riddled	terrain	of	Arabia	Terra.
I	do	have	one	thing	going	for	me.	And	I	swear	it's	a	gift	form	God. For	some		geological	reason,	there's	a	valley	called	Mawrth	Vallis	that's perfectly	placed.
Millions	of	years	ago	it	was	a	river.	Now	its	valley	that	juts	in	to	the brutal	terrain	of	Arabia	almost	directly	toward	Sciaparelli.	It's	much gentler	terrain	than	the	rest	of	Arabia	Terra,	and	the	far	end	looks	like	a smooth	ascent	out	of	the	valley.
Between	Acidalia	and	Mawrth	Vallis	I'll	get	1350km	of	relatively easy	terrain.
The	other	1850km...	well	that	won't	be	so	nice.	Especially	when	I have	to	descend	in	to	Schiaparelli	itself.	Ugh.
Anyway.		Mawrth	Vallis.	Awesome.


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	385

The	worst	part	of	the	Pathfinder	trip	was	being	trapped	in	the	rover.	I had	to	live	in	a	cramped	environment	that	was	full	of	junk	and	reeked	of body	odor.	Same	as	my	college	days.
Rim	shot!
Seriously	though,	it	sucked.	It	was	22	sols	of	abject	misery.
I	plan	to	leave	for	Schiaparelli	100	sols	before	my	rescue	(or	death), and	I	swear	to	....	God	I'll	rip	my	own	face	off	if	I	have	to	live	in	the rover	for	that	long.
I	need	a	place	to	stay	where	I	can	stand	up	and	take	a	few	steps without	hitting	things.	And	no,	being	outside	in	a	goddamn	EVA	suit doesn't	count.	I	need	personal	space,	not	50kg	of	clothing.
So	today,	I	started	making	a	tent.	Somewhere	I	can	relax	while	the batteries	recharge;	somewhere	I	can	lay	comfortably	while	sleeping.
I	recently	sacrificed	one	of	my	two	pop	tents	to	be	the	trailer	balloon. The	other	is	in	perfect	shape.	Even	better,	it	has	an	attachment	for	the rover's	airlock.	Before	I	made	it	a	potato	farm,	its	original	purpose	was	a lifeboat	for	the	rover.
I	could	attach	the	pop	tent	to	either	vehicle's	airlock.	I'm	going	with the	rover	instead	of	the	trailer.	The	rover	has	the	computer	and	controls. If	I	need	to	know	status	of	anything	(like	life	support	or	how	well	the battery	is	charging)	I'll	need	access.	This	way,	I'll	be	able	to	walk	right	in.
No	EVA.
Also,	while	traveling,	I'll	keep	it	folded	up	in	the	rover.	In	an emergency,	I	can	get	to	it	fast.
The	pop	tent	is	the	basis	of	my	“bedroom,”	but	not	the	whole	thing. It's	not	very	big;	not	much	more	space	than	the	rover.	But	it	has	the airlock	attachment	so	it's	a	great	place	to	start.	My	plan	is	to	double	the floor	area	and	double	the	height.	That'll	give	me	a	nice	big	space	to	relax in.
Hab	canvas	is	flexible.	When	you	fill	it	with	pressure,	it	wants	to become	a	sphere.	That's	not	a	useful	shape.	So	the	Hab	and	the	pop-tents have	special	flooring	material.	It	unfolds	as	a	bunch	of	little	segments that	won't	open	beyond	180	degrees	so	it	remains	flat.
The	pop	tent	base	is	a	hexagon.	I	have	another	base	left	over	from what	is	now	the	trailer	balloon.	So	when	it's	done,	my	bedroom	will	be two	adjacent	hexes	with	walls	around	them	and	a	crude	ceiling.
It's	gonna	take	a	lot	of	glue	to	make	this	happen.
LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	387
The	pop	tent	is	1.2m	tall.	It's	not	made	for	comfort.	It's	made	for astronauts	to	cower	in	while	their	crewmates	rescue	them.	I	want	2 meters.	I	want	to	be	able	to	stand!	I	don't	think	that's	too	much	to	ask.
On	paper,	it's	not	hard	to	do.	I	just	need	to	cut	canvas	pieces	to	the right	shapes,	seal	them	together,	then	seal	them	to	the	existing	canvas	and flooring.
But	that's	a	lot	of	canvas.	I	started	this	mission	with	6	square	meters and	I've	used	most	of	that	up.	Mostly	on	sealing	the	breach	from	when	the Hab	blew	up.
Goddamn	Airlock	1.
Anyway,	my	bedroom	will	take	30	square	meters	of	the	stuff.	Way	the hell	more	than	I	have	left.	Fortunately,	I	have	an	alternate	supply	of	Hab canvas:	The	Hab.
Problem	is	(follow	me	closely	here,	the	science	is	pretty	complicated) if	I	cut	a	hole	in	the	Hab,	the	air	won't	stay	inside	anymore.
I'll	have	to	depressurize	the	Hab,	cut	chunks	out,	and	put	it	back together	(smaller).	I	spent	today	figuring	out	the	exact	sizes	and	shapes	of canvas	I'll	need.	I	needed	to	not	....	this	up,	so	I	triple-checked everything.	I	even	made	a	model	out	of	paper.
The	Hab	is	a	dome.	If	I	take	canvas	from	near	the	floor,	I	can	pull	the remaining	canvas	down	and	re-seal	it.	The	Hab	will	become	a	lopsided dome,	but	that	shouldn't	matter.	As	long	as	it	holds	pressure.	I	only	need it	to	last	another	62	sols.
I	drew	the	shapes	on	the	wall	with	a	Sharpie.	Then	I	spent	a	long	time re-measuring	them	and	making	sure,	over	and	over,	that	they	were	right.
That	was	all	I	did	today.	Might	not	seem	like	much,	but	the	math	and design	work	took	all	day.	Now	it's	time	for	dinner.
I've	been	eating	potatoes	for	weeks.	Theoretically,	with	my	3/4	ration plan,	I	should	still	be	eating	food	packs.	But	3/4	ration	is	hard	to maintain,	so	now	I'm	eating	potatoes.
I	have	enough	to	last	till	launch,	so	I	won't	starve.	But	I'm	pretty damn	sick	of	potatoes.	Also,	they	have	a	lot	of	fiber,	so...	let's	just	say	it's good	I'm	the	only	guy	on	this	planet.
I	saved	5	meal	packs	for	special	occasions.	I	wrote	their	names	on each	one.	I	get	to	eat	“Departure”	the	day	I	leave	for	Schiaparelli.	I'll	eat “Half-way”	when	I	reach	the	1600km	mark,	and	“Arrival”	when	I	get there.
The	fourth	one	is	“Survived	Something	That	Should	Have	Killed	Me” because	some	....	thing	will	happen,	I	just	know	it.	I	don't	know	what it'll	be,	but	it'll	happen.	The	rover	will	break	down	or	I'll	come	down	with Fatal	Hemorrhoids	or	I'll	run	in	to	hostile	Martians	or	some	shit.	When	I do	(if	I	live)	I	get	to	eat	that	meal	pack.
The	fifth	one	is	reserved	for	the	day	I	launch.	It's	labeled	“Last	Meal.” Maybe	that's	not	such	a	good	name.
LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	388
I	started	the	day	with	a	potato.	I	washed	it	down	with	some	Martian Coffee.	That's	my	name	for	“hot	water	with	a	caffeine	pill	dissolved	in it.”	I	ran	out	of	real	coffee	months	ago.
My	first	order	of	business	was	a	careful	inventory	of	the	Hab.	I needed	to	root	out	anything	that	would	have	a	problem	with	losing atmospheric	pressure.	Of	course,	everything	in	the	Hab	had	a	crash	course in	depressurization	a	few	months	back.	But	this	time	would	be	controlled and	I	might	as	well	do	it	right.
The	main	thing	is	the	water.	I	lost	300L	to	sublimation	when	the	Hab blew	up.	This	time,	that	won't	happen.	I	drained	the	Water	Reclaimer	and sealed	all	the	tanks.
The	rest	was	just	collecting	knickknacks	and	dumping	them	in Airlock	3.	Anything	I	could	think	of	that	doesn't	do	well	in	a	nearvacuum.	The	three	remaining	laptops,	all	the	pens,	the	vitamin	bottles (probably	not	necessary	but	I'm	not	taking	chances),	medical	supplies, etc.
Then	I	did	a	controlled	shutdown	of	the	Hab.	The	critical	components are	designed	to	survive	a	vacuum.	Hab	depress	is	one	of	the	many scenarios	NASA	accounted	for.	One	system	at	a	time,	I	cleanly	shut	them all	down,	ending	with	the	main	computer	itself.
I	suited	up	and	depressurized	the	Hab.	Last	time,	the	canvas	collapsed and	made	a	mess	of	everything.	That's	not	supposed	to	happen.	The	dome of	the	Hab	is	mostly	supported	by	air	pressure,	but	there	are	flexible reenforcing	poles	across	the	inside	to	hold	the	canvas	up.	It's	how	the	Hab was	assembled	in	the	first	place.
I	watched	as	the	canvas	gently	settled	on	to	the	poles.	To	confirm	the depress,	I	opened	both	doors	of	Airlock	2.	I	left	Airlock	3	alone.	It maintained	pressure	for	its	cargo	of	random	crap.
Then	I	cut	shit	up!
I'm	not	a	materials	engineer;	my	design	for	the	bedroom	isn't	elegant. It's	just	a	2m	perimeter	and	a	ceiling.	No,	it	won't	have	right	angles	and corners	(pressure	vessels	don't	like	those).	It'll	balloon	out	to	a	more round	shape.
Anyway,	it	means	I	only	needed	to	cut	two	big-ass	strips	of	canvas.
One	for	the	walls	and	one	for	the	ceiling.
After	mangling	the	Hab,	I	pulled	the	remaining	canvas	down	to	the flooring	and	re-sealed	it.	Ever	set	up	a	camping	tent?	From	the	inside?
While	wearing	a	suit	of	armor?	It	was	a	pain	in	the	ass.
I	repressurized	to	1/20th	of	an	atmosphere	to	see	if	it	could	hold pressure.
Ha	ha	ha!	Of	course	it	couldn't!	Leaks	galore.	Time	to	find	them.
On	Earth,	tiny	particles	get	attached	to	water	or	wear	down	to	nothing. On	Mars,	they	just	hang	around.	The	top	layer	of	sand	is	like	talcum powder.	I	went	outside	with	a	bag	and	scraped	along	the	surface.	I	got some	normal	sand,	but	plenty	of	powder	too.
I	had	the	Hab	maintain	the	1/20th	atmosphere,	backfilling	as	air	leaked out.	Then	I	“puffed”	the	bag	to	get	the	smallest	particles	to	float	around. They	were	quickly	drawn	to	where	the	leaks	were.	As	I	found	each	leak,	I spot-sealed	it	with	resin.
It	took	hours,	but	I	finally	got	a	good	seal.	I'll	tell	ya,	the	Hab	looks pretty	“ghetto”	now.	One	whole	side	of	it	is	lower	than	the	rest.	I'll	have to	hunch	down	when	I'm	over	there.
I	pressurized	to	a	full	atmosphere	and	waited	an	hour.	No	leaks.
It's	been	a	long,	physically	taxing	day.	I'm	totally	exhausted	but	I can't	sleep.	Every	sound	scares	the	shit	out	of	me.	Is	that	the	Hab popping?	No?	Ok...	What	was	that!?	Oh,	nothing?	Ok...
It's	a	terrible	thing	to	have	my	life	depend	on	my	half-assed handiwork.
Time	to	get	a	sleeping	pill	from	the	medical	supplies.
LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	389
What	the	....	is	in	those	sleeping	pills!?	It's	the	middle	of	the	day.
After	two	cups	of	Martian	Coffee,	I	woke	up	a	little.	I	won't	be	taking another	one	of	those	pills.	It's	not	like	I	have	to	go	to	work	in	the morning.
Anyway,	as	you	can	tell	from	how	not	dead	I	am,	the	Hab	stayed sealed	overnight.	The	seal	is	solid.	Ugly	as	hell,	but	solid.
Today's	task	was	the	bedroom.
Assembling	the	bedroom	was	way	easier	than	re-sealing	the	Hab. Because	this	time,	I	didn't	have	to	wear	an	EVA	suit.	I	made	the	whole thing	inside	the	Hab.	Why	not?	It's	just	canvas.	I	can	roll	it	up	and	take	it out	an	airlock	when	I'm	done.
First,	I	did	some	surgery	on	the	remaining	pop	tent.	I	needed	to	keep the	rover-airlock	connector	and	surrounding	canvas.	The	rest	of	the canvas	had	to	go.	Why	hack	off	most	of	the	canvas	only	to	replace	it	with more	canvas?	Seams.
NASA	is	good	at	making	things.	I	am	not.	The	dangerous	part	of	this structure	won't	be	the	canvas.	It'll	be	the	seams.	And	I	get	less	total	seam length	by	not	trying	to	use	the	existing	pop-tent	canvas.
After	hacking	away	most	of	the	remaining	tent,	I	seal-stripped	the	two pop-tent	floors	together.	Then	I	sealed	the	new	canvas	pieces	in	to	place.
It	was	so	much	easier	without	the	EVA	suit	on.	So	much	easier!
Then	I	had	to	test	it.	Again,	I	did	it	in	the	Hab.	I	brought	an	EVA	suit in	to	the	tent	with	me	and	closed	the	mini-airlock	door.	Then	I	fired	up the	EVA	suit,	leaving	the	helmet	off.	I	told	it	to	bump	the	pressure	up	to 1.2	atm.
It	took	a	little	while	to	bring	it	up	to	par,	and	I	had	to	disable	some alarms	on	the	suit.	(“Hey,	I'm	pretty	sure	the	helmet's	not	on!”).	It depleted	most	of	the	N2	tank,	but	was	finally	able	to	bring	the	pressure up.
Then	I	sat	around	and	waited.	I	breathed,	the	suit	regulated	the	air.	All was	well.	I	watched	the	suit	readouts	carefully	to	see	if	it	had	to	replace any	“lost”	air.	After	an	hour	with	no	noticeable	change,	I	declared	the first	test	a	success.
I	rolled	up	the	whole	thing	(wadded	up,	really)	and	took	it	out	to	the rover.
You	know,	I	suit	up	a	lot	these	days.	I	bet	that's	another	record	I	hold. A	typical	Martian	astronaut	does,	what,	40	EVAs?	I've	done	several hundred.
Once	I	brought	the	bedroom	to	the	rover,	I	attached	it	to	the	airlock from	the	inside.	Then	I	pulled	the	release	to	let	it	loose.	I	was	still wearing	my	EVA	suit,	cause	I'm	not	an	idiot.
It	fired	out	and	filled	in	three	seconds.	The	open	airlock	hatchway	led directly	to	the	bedroom,	and	it	appeared	to	be	holding	pressure.
Just	like	before,	I	let	it	sit	for	an	hour.	And	just	like	before,	it	worked great.	Unlike	the	Hab	canvas	resealing,	I	got	this	one	right	on	the	first	try.
Mostly	because	I	didn't	have	to	do	it	with	a	damn	EVA	suit	on.
Originally	I	planned	to	let	it	sit	overnight	and	check	in	the	morning. But	I	ran	in	to	a		problem:	I	can't	get	out	if	I	do	that.	The	rover	only	has one	airlock,	and	the	bedroom	was	attached	to	it.	There	was	no	way	for	me to	get	out	without	detaching	the	bedroom,	and	no	way	to	attach	and pressurize	the	bedroom	without	being	inside	the	rover.
It's	a	little	scary.	The	first	time	I	test	the	thing	overnight	will	be	with me	in	it.	But	that'll	be	later.	I've	done	enough	today.


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	390

I	have	to	face	facts.	I'm	done	with	the	rover.	I	don't	“feel”	like	I'm done.	But	it's	ready	to	go:

Food:	1,692	potatoes.	Vitamin	pills.
Water:	620L.
Shelter:	Rover,	trailer,	bedroom.
Air:	Rover	and	trailer	combined	storage:	14L	liquid	O2,	14L	liquid N2.
Life	Support:	Oxygenator	and	Atmospheric	Regulator.	418	hours	of use-and-discard	CO2	filters	for	emergencies.
Power:	36kwh	of	storage.	Carrying	capacity	for	29	solar	cells.
Heat:	1400W	RTG.	Homemade	reservoir	to	heat	regulator's	return	air.
Electric	heater	in	rover	as	a	backup.
Disco:	Lifetime	supply.

I'm	leaving	here	on	Sol	449.	That	gives	me	59	sols	to	test	everything and	fix	whatever	isn't	working	right.	And	decide	what's	coming	with	me and	what's	staying	behind.	And	plot	a	route	to	Schiaparelli	using	a	grainy satellite	map.	And	rack	my	brains	trying	to	think	of	anything	important	I forgot.
Since	Sol	6	all	I've	wanted	to	do	was	get	the	hell	out	of	here.	Now	the prospect	of	leaving	the	Hab	behind	scares	the	shit	out	of	me.	I	need	some encouragement.	I	need	to	ask	myself:	“What	would	an	Apollo	astronaut do?”
He'd	drink	3	whiskey	sours,	bang	his	mistress,	then	fly	to	the	moon.
And	if	he	ever	met	a	botanist	like	me	he'd	dispense	a	wedgie	on	principle. To	hell	with	those	guys.	I'm	a	Space	Pirate!





	 
Chapter	21

LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	431

I'm	working	out	how	to	pack.	It's	harder	than	it	sounds.
I	have	two	pressure	vessels:	The	rover	and	the	trailer.	They're connected	by	hoses,	but	they're	also	not	stupid.	If	one	loses	pressure,	the other	will	instantly	seal	off	the	shared	lines.
There's	a	grim	logic	to	this:	If	the	rover	breaches	I'm	dead.	No	point in	planning	around	that.	But	if	the	trailer	breaches,	I'll	be	fine.	That means	I	should	put	everything	important	in	the	rover.	If	I'm	going	to	die, I	may	as	well	take	all	the	delicate	stuff	with	me.
Everything	that	goes	in	the	trailer	has	to	be	comfortable	in	nearvacuum	and	freezing	temperatures.	Not	that	I	anticipate	that,	but	you know.	Plan	for	the	worst.
There	isn't	much	room	to	spare.	It'll	have	two	bulky	Hab	batteries,	the Atmospheric	Regulator,	the	Oxygenator	and	my	home-made	heat reservoir.	It	would	be	more	convenient	to	have	the	reservoir	in	the	rover, but	it	has	to	be	near	the	Regulator's	return	air	feed.
It'll	be	cramped,	but	there	will	be	some	empty	spaces.	And	I	know just	how	to	fill	them:	Taters!
Nothing	“bad”	can	happen	to	the	potatoes.	They're	already	dead.	I've been	storing	them	outside	for	months	anyway.	Also,	they're	small	and	not delicate.	They	probably	won't	all	fit,	so	some	will	have	to	ride	with	me.
The	rover	will	be	pretty	packed,	too.	When	I'm	driving,	I'll	keep	the bedroom	folded	up	near	the	airlock,	ready	for	emergency	egress.	Also,	I'll have	the	two	functional	EVA	suits	in	there	with	me	and	anything	that might	be	needed	for	emergency	repairs:	Tool	kits,	spare	parts,	my	nearly depleted	supply	of	sealant,	the	other	rover's	main	computer	(just	in	case!) and	all	620	glorious	liters	of	water.
And	a	plastic	box	to	to	serve	as	a	toilet.	One	with	a	good	lid.


“How's	Watney	doing?”	Venkat	asked.
Mindy	looked	up	from	her	computer	with	a	start.	“Dr.	Kapoor?”
“I	hear	you	caught	a	pic	of	him	during	an	EVA?”
“Uh,	yeah,”	Mindy	said,	typing	on	her	keyboard.	“I	noticed	things would	always	change	around	9am	local	time.	People	usually	keep	the same	patterns	so	I	figured	he	likes	to	start	work	around	then.	I	did	some minor	realignment	to	get	seventeen	pics	between	9:00	and	9:10.	He showed	up	in	one	of	them.”
“Good	thinking.	Can	I	see	the	pic?”
“Sure,”	she	said.	She	brought	up	the	image	on	her	screen.
Venkat	peered	at	the	blurry	image.	“Is	this	as	good	as	it	gets?”
“Well	it	is	a	photo	taken	from	orbit,”	Mindy	said.	“The	NSA enhanced	the	image	with	the	best	software	they	have.”
“Wait,	What?”	Venkat	stammered.	“The	NSA?”
“Yeah,	they	called	and	offered	to	help	out.	Same	software	they	use	for enhancing	spy	satellite	imagery.”
Venkat	shrugged.	“It's	amazing	how	much	red	tape	gets	cut	when everyone's	rooting	for	one	man	to	survive.”	He	pointed	to	the	screen.
“What's	Watney	doing	here?”
“I	think	he's	loading	something	into	the	rover.”
“When	was	the	last	time	he	worked	on	the	trailer?”	Venkat	asked.
“Not	for	a	while.	Why	doesn't	he	write	us	notes	more	often?”
Venkat	shrugged.	“He's	busy.	He	works	most	of	the	daylight	hours, and	arranging	rocks	to	spell	a	message	takes	time	and	energy.”
“So...”	Mindy	said.	“Why'd	you	come	here	in	person?	We	could	have done	all	this	over	email.”
“Actually,	I	came	to	talk	to	you,”	he	said.	“There's	going	to	be	a change	in	your	responsibilities.	From	now	on,	instead	of	managing	the satellites	around	Mars,	your	sole	responsibility	is	watching	Mark
Watney.”
“What?”	Mindy	said.	“What	about	course	corrections	and alignment?”
“We'll	assign	that	to	other	people,”	Venkat	said.	“From	now	on,	your only	focus	is	examining	imagery	of	Ares	3.”
“That's	a	demotion,”	Mindy	said.	“I'm	an	orbital	engineer,	and	you're turning	me	in	to	a	glorified	Peeping	Tom.”
“It's	short-term,”	Venkat	said.	“And	we'll	make	it	up	to	you.	Thing	is, you've	been	doing	it	for	months	and	you're	an	expert	at	identifying elements	of	Ares	3	from	satellite	pics.	We	don't	have	anyone	else	who can	do	that.”
“Why	is	this	suddenly	so	important?”
“He's	running	out	of	time,”	Venkat	said.	“We	don't	know	how	far along	he	is	on	the	rover	modifications.	But	we	do	know	he's	on	only	got 16	sols	to	get	them	done.	We	need	to	know	exactly	what	he's	doing.	I've got	media	outlets	and	senators	asking	for	his	status	all	the	time.	The President	even	called	me	a	couple	of	times.
“But	seeing	his	status	doesn't	help,”	Mindy	said.	“It's	not	like	we	can do	anything	about	it	if	he	falls	behind.	This	is	a	pointless	task.”
“How	long	have	you	worked	for	the	government?”	Venkat	sighed.


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	434

The	time	has	come	to	test	this	shit	out.
This	presents	a	problem.	Unlike	my	Pathfinder	trip,	I	have	to	take vital	life	support	elements	out	of	the	Hab.	When	you	take	the
Atmospheric	Regulator	and	Oxygenator	out	of	the	Hab,	you're	left	with... a	tent.	A	big	round	tent	that	can't	support	life.
It's	not	as	risky	as	it	seems.	As	always,	the	dangerous	part	about	life support	is	managing	carbon	dioxide.	When	the	air	gets	to	1%	CO2,	you start	getting	symptoms	of	poisoning.	So	I	need	to	keep	it	below	that.
The	Hab's	internal	volume	is	about	120,000L.	Breathing	normally,	it would	take	me	over	two	days	to	bring	the	CO2	level	up	to	1%	(and	I wouldn't	even	dent	in	the	O2	level).	So	it's	safe	to	move	the	Regulator and	Oxygenator	over	for	a	while.
Both	are	way	too	big	to	fit	through	the	trailer	airlock.	Lucky	for	me, they	came	to	Mars	with	“some	assembly	required”.	They	were	too	big	to send	whole,	so	they're	easy	to	dismantle.
Over	several	trips,	I	took	all	their	chunks	to	the	trailer.	I	brought	each chunk	in	through	the	airlock,	one	at	a	time.	It	was	a	pain	in	the	ass reassembling	them	inside,	let	me	tell	you.	There's	barely	enough	room	for all	the	shit	it's	got	to	hold.	There	wasn't	much	left	for	our	intrepid	hero.
Then	I	got	the	AREC.	It	sat	outside	the	Hab	like	an	AC	unit	might	on Earth.	In	a	way,	that's	what	it	was.	I	hauled	it	over	to	the	trailer	and lashed	it	to	the	shelf	I'd	made	for	it.	Then	I	hooked	it	up	to	the	feed	lines that	led	through	the	“balloon”	to	the	inside	of	the	trailer's	pressure	vessel.
The	Regulator	needs	to	send	air	to	the	AREC	then	the	return	air	needs to	bubble	through	the	heat	reservoir.	And,	it	needs	a	pressure	tank	to dump	the	CO2	it	pulls	from	the	air.
When	gutting	the	trailer	to	make	room,	I	left	one	tank	in	place	for this.	It's	supposed	to	hold	oxygen,	but	a	tank's	a	tank.	Thank	God	all	the air	lines	and	valves	are	standardized	across	the	mission.	That's	no mistake.	It's	a	deliberate	decision	for	maintenance	purposes.	We	could	fix things	in	the	field	easier	that	way.
Once	everything	assembled,	I	hooked	them	in	to	the	trailer's	power and	watched	them	power	up.	I	ran	both	through	full	diagnostics	to confirm	they	were	working	correctly.	Then	I	shut	down	the	Oxygenator.
Remember,	I'll	only	use	it	one	sol	out	of	every	5.
I	moved	to	the	rover,	which	means	I	had	to	do	an	annoying	10-meter EVA.	From	there	I	monitored	the	life	support	situation.	It's	worth	noting that	I	can't	monitor	the	actual	support	equipment	from	the	rover	(it's	all in	the	trailer),	but	the	rover	can	tell	me	all	about	the	air.	Oxygen,	CO2, temperature,	humidity,	etc.	Everything	seemed	ok.
Getting	back	in	to	the	EVA	suit,	I	released	a	canister	of	CO2	in	to	the rover's	air.	I	watched	the	rover	computer	have	a	shit-fit	when	it	saw	the CO2	spike	to	lethal	levels.	Then,	over	time,	the	levels	dropped	to	normal.
The	regulator	was	doing	its	job.	Good	boy!
I	left	the	equipment	running	when	I	returned	to	the	Hab.	It'll	be	on	its own	all	night	and	I'll	check	it	in	the	morning.	It's	not	a	true	test,	because I'm	not	there	to	breathe	up	the	oxygen	and	make	CO2,	but	one	step	at	a time.
LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	435
Last	night	was	weird.	I	knew	logically	that	nothing	bad	would	happen in	just	one	night,	but	it	was	a	little	unnerving	to	know	I	had	no	life support	other	than	heaters.	My	life	depended	on	some	math	I	did	earlier. If	I	dropped	a	sign	or	added	two	numbers	wrong,	I	might	never	wake	up. But	I	did	wake	up,	and	the	main	computer	showed	the	slight	rise	in CO2	I	had	predicted.	Looks	like	I	live	another	Sol.
“Live	Another	Sol”	would	be	an	awesome	name	for	a	James	Bond movie.
I	checked	up	on	the	rover.	Everything	was	fine.	If	I	don't	drive	it,	a single	charge	of	the	batteries	could	keep	the	regulator	going	for	over	a month	(with	the	heater	off).	It's	a	pretty	good	safety	margin	to	have.	If	all hell	breaks	loose	on	my	trip	I'll	have	time	to	fix	things.	I'd	be	limited	by oxygen	consumption	rather	than	CO2	removal,	and	I	have	plenty	of oxygen.
I	decided	it	was	a	good	time	to	test	the	bedroom.
I	got	in	the	rover,	and	attached	the	bedroom	to	the	outer	airlock	door from	the	inside.	Like	I	mentioned	before,	this	is	the	only	way	to	do	it.
Then	I	turned	it	loose	on	an	unsuspecting	Mars.
As	intended,	the	pressure	from	the	rover	blasted	the	canvas	outward and	inflated	it.	After	that,	chaos.	The	sudden	pressure	popped	the bedroom	like	a	balloon.	It	quickly	deflated,	leaving	both	itself	and	the rover	devoid	of	air.	I	was	wearing	my	EVA	suit	at	the	time;	I'm	not	a ....	idiot.	So	I	get	to...
Live	Another	Sol!	(Starring	Mark	Watney	as	…	probably	Q.	I'm	no
James	Bond.)
I	dragged	the	popped	bedroom	in	to	the	Hab	and	gave	it	a	good	goingover.	It	failed	at	the	seam	where	the	wall	met	the	ceiling.	Makes	sense.
It's	a	right-angle	in	a	pressure	vessel.	Physics	hates	that	sort	of	thing.
First,	I	patched	it	up,	then	I	cut	strips	of	spare	canvas	to	place	over	the seam.	Now	it	has	double-thickness	and	double	sealing	resin	all	around. Maybe	that'll	be	enough.	At	this	point,	I'm	kind	of	guessing.	My	amazing botany	skills	aren't	much	use	for	this.
I'll	test	it	again	tomorrow.


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	436

I'm	out	of	caffeine	pills.	No	more	Martian	Coffee	for	me.
So	it	took	a	little	longer	for	me	to	wake	up	this	morning,	and	I	spent most	of	the	day	with	a	headache.	One	nice	thing	about	living	in	a	multibillion	dollar	mansion	on	Mars:	Access	to	pure	oxygen.	For	some	reason, a	high	concentration	of	O2	will	kill	most	headaches.	Don't	know	why.
Don't	care.	The	important	thing	is	I	don't	have	to	suffer.
I	tested	out	the	bedroom	again.	I	used	the	same	process	as	yesterday. This	time	it	held.	So	is	that	good?	I	don't	know.	That's	the	shitty	part	of failure	analysis.	If	the	bedroom	fails	while	I'm	sleeping	in	it,	I'll	die.	How long	will	it	last?
Hopefully,	if	it	developed	a	leak,	it'd	be	slow	enough	that	I	could react.	But	you	never	know.
After	a	few	minutes	standing	around	in	my	EVA	suit,	I	decided	to make	better	use	of	my	time.	I	may	not	be	able	to	leave	while	the	bedroom is	attached	to	the	airlock,	but	I	can	go	in	to	the	rover	and	close	the	door.
Once	I	did	that,	I	took	off	the	uncomfortable	EVA	suit.	The	bedroom was	on	the	other	side	of	the	airlock	door,	still	fully	pressurized.	So	I'm still	running	my	test,	but	I	don't	have	to	wear	the	EVA	suit.
I	wanted	a	good	long	test	(I	arbitrarily	picked	8	hours)	so	I	was trapped	in	the	rover	until	then.
I	spent	my	time	planning	the	trip.	There	wasn't	much	to	add	to	what	I already	knew.	I'll	bee-line	to	Mawrth	Vallis,	then	follow	it	until	it	ends.
It'll	take	me	on	a	zig-zag	route,	but	mostly	toward	Schiaparelli.
After	that	comes	Arabia	Terra.	Each	crater	represents	two	brutal elevation	changes.	First	down,	then	up.	I	did	my	best	to	find	the	shortest path	around	them.	I'm	sure	I'll	have	to	adjust	the	course	when	I'm	actually driving	it.	No	plan	survives	first	contact	with	the	enemy.

Mitch	took	his	seat	in	the	conference	room.	The	usual	gang	was	there: Teddy,	Venkat,	Mitch,	and	Annie.	But	this	time	there	was	also	Mindy Park	as	well	as	a	man	Mitch	had	never	seen	before.
“What's	up,	Venk?”	Mitch	asked.	“Why	the	sudden	meeting?”
“We've	got	some	developments,”	Venkat	said.	“Mindy,	why	don't	you bring	them	up	to	date.”
“Uh,	yeah,”	Mindy	said.	“Looks	like	Watney	finished	the	balloon addition	to	the	trailer.	It	mostly	uses	the	design	we	sent	him.” “Any	idea	how	stable	it	is?”	Teddy	asked.
“Pretty	stable,”	she	said.	“It's	been	inflated	for	several	days	with	no problems.	Also	he	built	some	kind	of...	room.” “Room?”	Teddy	asked.
“It's	made	of	Hab	canvas,	I	think,”	Mindy	explained.	“It	attaches	to the	rover's	airlock.	I	think	he	cut	a	section	out	of	the	Hab	to	make	it.	I don't	know	what	it's	for.”
Teddy	turned	to	Venkat.	“Why	would	he	do	that?”
“We	think	it's	a	workshop,”	Venkat	said.	“There'll	be	a	lot	of	work	to do	on	the	MAV	once	he	gets	to	Schiaparelli.	It'll	be	easier	without	an
EVA	suit.	He	probably	plans	to	do	as	much	as	he	can	in	that	room.” “Clever,”	Teddy	said.
“Watney's	a	clever	guy,”	Mitch	said.	“How	about	getting	life	support in	there?”
“I	think	he's	done	it,”	Mindy	said.	“He	moved	the	AREC.”
“Sorry,”	Annie	interrupted.	“What's	an	AREC?”
“It's	the	external	component	of	the	Atmospheric	Regulator,”	Mindy said.	“It	sits	outside	the	Hab,	so	I	know	when	it	disappeared.	He	probably mounted	it	on	the	rover.	There's	no	other	reason	to	move	it	so	I'm guessing	he's	got	life	support	online.”
“Awesome,”	Mitch	said.	“Things	are	coming	together.”
“Don't	celebrate	yet,	Mitch,”	Venkat	said.	“This	is	Randall	Carter, one	of	our	Martian	meteorologists.	Randall,	tell	them	what	you	told	me.”
Randall	nodded.	“Thank	you,	Dr.	Kapoor.”	He	turned	his	laptop around	to	show	a	map	of	Mars.	“Over	the	past	few	weeks,	a	dust	storm has	been	developing	in	Arabia	Terra.	Not	a	big	deal	in	terms	of magnitude.	It	won't	hinder	his	driving	at	all.” “So	what's	the	problem?”	Annie	asked.
“It's	a	low-velocity	dust	storm,”	Randall	Explained.	“Slow	winds,	but fast	enough	to	pick	up	very	small	particles	on	the	surface	and	whip	them up	in	to	thick	clouds.	There	are	five	or	six	of	them	every	year.	The	thing is,	they	last	for	months,	they	cover	huge	sections	of	the	planet,	and	they make	the	atmosphere	thick	with	dust.”
“I	still	don't	see	the	problem,”	Annie	said.
“Light,”	Randall	said.	“The	total	sunlight	reaching	the	surface	is	very low	in	the	area	of	the	storm.	Right	now,	it's	20%	of	normal.	And
Watney's	rover	is	powered	by	solar	panels.”
“Shit,”	Mitch	said,	rubbing	his	eyes.	“And	we	can't	warn	him.”
“So	he	gets	less	power.”	Annie	said.	“Can't	he	just	recharge	longer?”
“The	current	plan	already	has	him	recharging	all	day	long,”	Venkat explained.	“With	20%	of	normal	daylight,	it'll	take	five	times	as	long	to get	the	same	energy.	It'll	turn	his	45	sol	trip	in	to	225	sols.	He'll	miss	the
Hermes	flyby.”
“Can't	Hermes	wait	for	him?”	Annie	asked.
“It's	a	flyby,”	Venkat	said.	“Hermes	isn't	going	in	to	Martian	orbit.	If they	did,	they	wouldn't	be	able	to	get	back.	They	need	their	velocity	for the	return	trajectory.”
After	a	few	moments	of	silence,	Teddy	said	“We'll	just	have	to	hope he	finds	a	way	through.	We	can	track	his	progress	and-” “No	we	can't,”	Mindy	interrupted.
“We	can't?”	Teddy	said.
She	shook	her	head.	“The	satellites	won't	be	able	to	see	through	the dust.	Once	he	enters	the	affected	area,	we	won't	see	anything	until	he comes	out	the	other	side.”
“Well...”	Teddy	said.	“Shit.”


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	439
Before	I	risk	my	life	with	this	contraption,	I	need	to	test	it.
And	not	the	little	tests	I've	been	doing	so	far.	Sure,	I've	tested	power generation,	life	support,	the	trailer	bubble,	and	the	bedroom.	But	I	need	to test	all	aspects	of	it	working	together.
I'm	going	to	load	it	up	for	the	long	trip,	and	drive	in	circles.	I	won't ever	be	more	than	500	meters	from	the	Hab,	so	I'll	be	fine	if	shit	breaks.
I	dedicated	today	to	loading	up	the	rover	and	trailer	for	the	test.	I want	the	weight	to	match	what	it'll	be	on	the	real	trip.	Plus	if	cargo	is going	to	shift	around	or	break	things	I	want	to	know	about	it	now.
I	made	one	concession	to	common	sense:	I	left	most	of	my	water supply	in	the	Hab.	I	loaded	20	liters;	enough	for	the	test	but	no	more. There	are	a	lot	of	ways	I	could	lose	pressure	in	this	mechanical abomination	I've	created,	and	I	don't	want	all	my	water	to	boil	off	if	that happens.
On	the	real	trip,	I'm	going	to	have	620L	of	water.	I	made	up	the weight	difference	by	loading	600kg	of	rocks	in	with	my	other	supplies.
Back	on	Earth,	universities	and	governments	are	willing	to	pay millions	to	get	their	hands	on	Mars	rocks.	I'm	using	them	as	ballast.
I'm	doing	one	more	little	test	tonight.	I	made	sure	the	batteries	were good	and	full,	then	disconnected	the	rover	and	trailer	from	Hab	power.	I'll be	sleeping	in	the	Hab,	but	I	left	the	rover's	life	support	on.	It'll	maintain the	air	overnight,	and	tomorrow	I'll	see	how	much	power	it	ate	up.	I've watched	the	power	consumption	while	it's	attached	to	the	Hab	and	there weren't	any	surprises.	But	this'll	be	the	true	proof.	I	call	it	the	“Plugs-out test.”
Maybe	that's	not	the	best	name.


The	crew	of	Hermes	gathered	in	The	Rec.
“Let's	get	through	status	quickly,”	Lewis	said.	“We're	all	behind	in our	science	assignments.	Vogel,	you	first.”
“I	repaired	the	bad	cable	on	VASIMR	4,”	Vogel	reported.	“It	was	our last	thick	gauge	cable.	If	another	such	problem	occurs,	we	will	have	to braid	lower	gauge	lines	to	carry	the	current.	Also,	the	power	output	from the	reactor	is	declining.”
“Johanssen,”	Lewis	said.	“What	the	deal	with	the	reactor?”
“I	had	to	dial	it	back,”	Johanssen	said.	“It's	the	cooling	vanes.	They aren't	radiating	heat	as	well	as	they	used	to.	They're	tarnishing.”
“How	can	that	happen?”	Lewis	asked.	“They're	outside	the	craft.
There's	nothing	for	them	to	react	with.”
“I	think	they	picked	up	dust	or	small	air	leaks	from	Hermes	itself. One	way	or	another,	they're	definitely	tarnishing.	The	tarnish	is connecting	the	micro-lattice,	and	that	reduces	the	surface	area.	Less surface	area	means	less	heat	dissipation.	So	I	limited	the	reactor	enough that	we	weren't	getting	positive	heat.”
“Any	chance	of	repairing	the	cooling	vanes?”
“It's	on	the	microscopic	scale,”	Johanssen	said.	“We'd	need	a	lab.
Usually	they	replace	the	veins	after	each	mission.”
“Will	we	be	able	to	maintain	engine	power	for	the	rest	of	the mission?”
“Yes,	if	the	rate	of	tarnishing	doesn't	increase.”
“All	right,	keep	an	eye	on	it.	Beck,	how's	life	support?”
“Limping,”	Beck	said.	“We've	been	in	space	way	longer	than	it	was designed	to	handle.	There	are	a	bunch	of	filters	that	would	normally	be replaced	each	mission.	I	found	a	way	to	clean	them	with	a	chemical	bath	I made	in	the	lab,	but	it	eats	away	at	the	filters	themselves.	We're	ok	right now,	but	who	knows	what'll	break	next?”
“We	knew	this	would	happen,”	Lewis	said.	“This	ship	is	designed	for a	396	day	mission,	and	we	need	to	make	it	last	898.	We've	got	all	of NASA	to	help	when	things	break.	We	just	need	to	stay	on	top	of maintenance.	Martinez,	what's	the	deal	with	your	bunkroom?”
Martinez	furrowed	his	brow.	“It's	still	trying	to	cook	me.	The	climate control	just	isn't	keeping	up.	I	think	it's	the	tubing	in	the	walls	that	brings the	coolant.	I	can't	get	at	them	because	they're	built	in	to	the	hull.	We	can use	the	room	for	storage	of	non-temperature-sensitive	cargo,	but	that's about	it.”
“Where	have	you	been	sleeping?”
“In	Airlock	2.	It's	the	only	place	I	can	be	without	people	tripping	over me.”
“No	good,”	Lewis	said,	shaking	her	head.	“If	one	seal	breaks,	you die.”
“I	can't	think	of	anywhere	else	to	sleep,”	he	said.	“The	ship	is	pretty cramped,	and	if	I	sleep	in	a	hallway	I'll	be	in	people's	way.”
“Ok,	from	now	on,	sleep	in	Beck's	room.	Beck	can	sleep	with
Johanssen.”
Johanssen	blushed	and	looked	down	awkwardly.
“So...”	Beck	said,	“You	know	about	that?”
“You	thought	I	didn't?”	Lewis	said.	“It's	a	small	ship.”
“You're	not	mad?”
“If	it	were	a	normal	mission,	I	would	be,”	Lewis	said.	“But	we're	way off-script	now.	Just	keep	it	from	interfering	with	your	duties	and	I'm happy.”
“Million-mile-high	club,”	Martinez	said.	“Nice!”
Johanssen	blushed	deeper	and	buried	her	face	in	her	hands.
LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	444
I'm	getting	pretty	good	at	this.	Maybe	when	all	this	is	over	I	could	be a	product-tester	for	Mars	rovers.
Things	went	well.	I	spent	five	sols	driving	in	circles;	I	averaged	93 km	per	sol.	That's	a	little	better	than	I'd	expected.	The	terrain	here	is	flat and	smooth,	so	it's	pretty	much	a	best-case	scenario.	Once	I'm	going	up hills	and	around	boulders	it	won't	be	nearly	that	good.
The	bedroom	is	awesome.	Large,	spacious,	and	comfortable.	On	the first	night,	I	ran	in	to	a	little	problem	with	the	temperature.	It	was	.... cold.	The	rover	and	trailer	regulate	their	own	temperatures	just	fine,	but things	weren't	hot	enough	in	the	bedroom.
Story	of	my	life.
The	rover	has	an	electric	heater	that	pushes	air	with	a	small	fan.	I don't	use	it	for	anything	because	the	RTG	provides	all	the	heat	I	need.	I liberated	the	fan	and	wired	it	in	to	a	power	line	near	the	airlock.	Once	it had	power	all	I	had	to	do	was	point	it	at	the	bedroom.
It's	a	low-tech	solution,	but	it	worked.	There's	plenty	of	heat,	thanks to	the	RTG.	I	just	needed	to	get	it	evenly	spread	out.	For	once,	entropy was	on	my	side.
I	fell	in	to	a	routine	pretty	quickly.	In	fact,	it	was	hauntingly	familiar. I	did	it	for	22	miserable	days	on	the	Pathfinder	trip.	But	this	time,	I	had the	bedroom	and	that	makes	all	the	difference.	Instead	of	being	cooped	up in	the	rover,	I	have	my	own	little	Hab.
The	procedure	is	what	you'd	expect.	After	waking	up,	I	have	a	potato for	breakfast.	Then,	I	deflate	the	bedroom	from	the	inside.	It's	kind	of tricky,	but	I	worked	out	how.
First,	I	put	on	an	EVA	suit.	Then	I	close	the	inner	airlock	door, leaving	the	outer	door	(which	the	bedroom	is	attached	to)	open.	This isolates	the	bedroom,	with	me	in	it,	from	the	rest	of	the	rover.	Then	I	tell the	airlock	to	depressurize.	It	thinks	it's	just	pumping	the	air	out	of	a small	area,	but	it's	actually	deflating	the	whole	bedroom.
Once	the	pressure	is	gone,	I	pull	the	canvas	in	and	fold	it.	Then	I detach	it	from	the	outer	hatch	and	close	the	outer	door.	This	is	the	most cramped	part.	I	have	to	share	the	airlock	with	the	entire	folded	up bedroom	while	it	repressurizes.	Once	I	have	pressure	again,	I	open	the inner	door	and	more-or-less	fall	in	to	the	rover.	Then	I	stow	the	bedroom, and	go	back	to	the	airlock	for	a	normal	egress	to	Mars.
It's	a	complicated	process,	but	it	detaches	the	bedroom	without	having to	depressurize	the	rover	cabin.	Remember,	the	rover	has	all	my	stuff	that doesn't	play	well	with	vacuum.
The	next	step	is	to	gather	up	the	solar	cells	I'd	laid	out	the	day	before and	stow	them	on	the	rover	and	trailer.	Then	I	do	a	quick	check	on	the trailer.	I	go	in	through	its	airlock	and	basically	take	a	quick	look	at	all	the equipment.	I	don't	even	take	off	my	EVA	suit.	I	just	want	to	make	sure nothing's	obviously	wrong.
Then,	back	to	the	rover.	Once	inside,	I	take	off	the	EVA	suit	and	start driving.	I	drive	for	almost	4	hours,	and	then	I'm	out	of	power.
Once	I	park,	it's	back	in	to	the	EVA	suit	for	me,	and	out	to	Mars again.	I	lay	the	solar	panels	out	and	get	the	batteries	charging.
Then	I	set	up	the	bedroom.	Pretty	much	the	reverse	of	the	sequence	I use	to	stow	it.	Ultimately	it's	the	airlock	that	inflates	it.	In	a	way,	the bedroom	is	just	an	extension	of	the	airlock.
Even	though	it's	possible,	I	don't	rapid-inflate	the	bedroom.	I	did	that to	test	it	because	I	wanted	to	find	where	it'll	leak.	But	it's	not	a	good	idea. Rapid	inflation	puts	a	lot	of	shock	and	pressure	on	it.	It	would	eventually rupture.	I	didn't	enjoy	that	time	the	Hab	launched	me	like	a	cannonball.
I'm	not	eager	to	repeat	it.
Once	the	bedroom	is	set	up	again,	I	can	take	off	my	EVA	suit	and relax	the	rest	of	the	day.	I	mostly	watch	crappy	70's	TV.	I'm indistinguishable	from	an	unemployed	guy	for	most	of	the	day.
I	followed	that	process	for	four	sols,	and	then	it	was	time	for	an	“Air Day”.
An	Air	Day	turns	out	to	be	pretty	much	the	same	as	any	other	day,	but without	the	4	hour	drive.	Once	I	set	up	the	solar	panels,	I	fired	up	the Oxygenator	and	let	it	work	through	the	backlog	of	CO2	the	Regulator	had stored	up.
Once	it	was	done,	my	test	run	was	complete.	It	converted	all	the	CO2 to	oxygen,	and	used	up	the	day's	power	generation	to	do	it. The	test	was	a	success.	I'll	be	ready	on	time.


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	449

Today's	the	big	day.	I'm	leaving	for	Schiaparelli.
The	rover	and	trailer	are	all	packed.	They've	been	mostly	packed since	the	test	run.	But	now	I	even	have	the	water	aboard.
I	spent	the	last	several	days	running	full	diagnostics	on	everything. The	Regulator,	Oxygenator,	RTG,	AREC,	batteries,	rover	life	support	(in case	I	need	a	backup),	solar	cells,	rover	computer,	airlocks,	and everything	else	with	a	moving	part	or	electronic	component.	I	even checked	each	of	the	motors.	Eight	in	all,	one	for	each	wheel,	four	on	the rover,	four	on	the	trailer.	The	trailer's	motors	won't	be	powered,	but	it's nice	to	have	backups.
It's	all	good	to	go.	No	problems	that	I	can	see.
The	Hab	is	a	shell	of	its	former	self.	I've	robbed	it	of	all	critical components	and	a	big	chunk	of	its	canvas.	I've	looted	that	poor	Hab	for everything	it	could	give	me,	and	in	return	it's	kept	me	alive	for	a	year	and a	half.	It's	like	The	Giving	Tree.
I	performed	the	final	shutdown	today.	The	heaters,	lighting,	main computer,	etc.	All	the	components	I	didn't	steal	for	the	trip	to Schiaparelli.
I	could	have	left	them	on.	It's	not	like	anyone	would	care.	But	the original	procedure	for	Sol	31	(which	was	supposed	to	be	the	last	day	of the	surface	mission)	was	to	completely	shut	down	the	Hab	and	deflate	it. NASA	didn't	want	a	big	tent	full	of	combustible	oxygen	next	to		the	MAV when	it	launched,	so	they	added	the	shutdown	process	to	the	mission.
I	guess	I	did	it	as	an	homage	to	the	mission	Ares	3	could	have	been.	A small	piece	of	the	Sol	31	I	never	got	to	have.
Once	I	shut	everything	down,	an	eerie	silence	was	all	that	remained. I've	spent	449	sols	listening	to	the	heaters,	vents,	and	fans.	But	now	it	was dead	quiet.	It's	a	creepy,	eerie	kind	of	quiet	that's	hard	to	describe.	I've been	away	from	the	Hab	before,	but	always	in	the	rover	or	an	EVA	suit.
There's	always	some	kind	of	machinery	in	operation.
But	now	there	was	nothing.	I	never	realized	how	utterly	silent	Mars is.	It's	a	desert	world	with	practically	no	atmosphere	to	convey	sound.	I could	hear	my	own	heartbeat.
Anyway,	enough	waxing	philosophical.
I'm	in	the	rover	right	now.	(That	should	be	obvious,	with	the	Hab main	computer	offline	forever.)	I've	got	2	full	batteries,	all	systems	are go	and	I've	got	45	sols	of	driving	ahead	of	me.
Schiaparelli	or	bust!


Chapter	22

LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	458

Mawrth	Vallis!	I'm	finally	here!
Actually,	it's	not	an	impressive	accomplishment.	I've	only	been traveling	10	sols.	But	it's	a	good	psychological	milestone.
So	far,	the	rover	and	my	ghetto	life	support	are	working	admirably.	At least,	as	well	as	can	be	expected	for	equipment	being	used	ten	times longer	than	intended.
Today	is	my	second	Air	Day	(the	first	was	5	sols	ago).	When	I	put this	scheme	together,	I	figured	Air	Days	would	be	godawful	boring.	But now	I	look	forward	to	them.	They're	my	days	off.
On	a	normal	day	I	get	up,	fold	up	the	bedroom,	stack	the	solar	cells, drive	four	hours,	set	up	the	solar	cells,	unfurl	the	bedroom,	check	all	my equipment	(especially	the	rover	chassis	and	wheels),	then	make	a	Morse Code	status	report	for	NASA	if	I	can	find	enough	nearby	rocks.
On	an	Air	Day,	I	wake	up	and	turn	on	the	Oxygenator.	The	solar panels	are	already	out	from	the	day	before.	Everything's	ready	to	go. Then	I	chill	out	in	the	bedroom	or	rover.	I	have	the	whole	day	to	myself. The	bedroom	gives	me	enough	space	that	I	don't	feel	cooped	up,	and	the computer	has	plenty	of	shitty	TV	reruns	for	me	to	enjoy.
Technically,	I	entered	Mawrth	Vallis	yesterday.	But	I	only	knew	that by	looking	at	a	map.	The	entrance	to	the	valley	is	wide	enough	that	I couldn't	see	the	canyon	walls	in	either	direction.
But	now	I'm	definitely	in	a	canyon.	And	the	bottom	is	nice	and	flat. Exactly	what	I	was	hoping	for.	It's	amazing;	this	valley	wasn't	made	by	a river	slowly	carving	it	away.	It	was	made	by	a	mega-flood	in	a	single	day.
It	would	have	been	a	hell	of	a	thing	to	see.
Weird	thought:	I'm	not	in	Acidalia	Planitia	any	more.	I	spent	457	sols there,	almost	a	year	and	a	half,	and	I'll	never	go	back.	I	wonder	if	I'll	be nostalgic	about	that	later	in	life.
If	there	is	a	“later	in	life,”	I'll	be	happy	to	endure	a	little	nostalgia	in return.	But	for	now	I	just	want	to	go	home.


“Welcome	back	to	CNN's	Mark	Watney	Report,”	Cathy	said	to	the camera.	“We're	speaking	with	our	frequent	guest,	Dr.	Venkat	Kapoor.	Dr.
Kapoor,	I	guess	what	people	want	to	know	is:	Is	Mark	Watney	doomed?”
“We	hope	not,”	Venkat	responded.	“But	he's	got	a	real	challenge ahead	of	him.”
“According	to	your	latest	satellite	data,	the	dust	storm	in	Arabia	Terra isn't	abating	at	all,	and	will	block	80%	of	the	sunlight?”
“That's	correct.”
“And	can	Watney's	only	source	of	energy	is	his	solar	panels,	correct?” “Yes,	that's	right.”
“Can	his	makeshift	rover	operate	at	20%	power?”
“We	haven't	found	any	way	to	make	that	happen,	no.	His	life	support alone	takes	more	energy	than	that.”
“How	long	until	he	enters	the	Tau	Event.”
“He's	just	entered	Mawrth	Vallis	now.	At	his	current	rate	of	travel, he'll	be	at	the	edge	of	the	Tau	Event	on	Sol	471.	That's	12	days	from now.”
“Surely	he'll	see	something	is	wrong,”	Cathy	said.	“With	such	low visibility,	it	won't	take	long	for	him	to	realize	his	solar	cells	will	have	a problem.	Couldn't	he	just	turn	around	at	that	point?”
“Unfortunately,	everything's	working	against	him,”	Venkat	said.	“The edge	of	the	storm	isn't	a	magic	line.	It's	just	an	area	where	the	dust	gets	a little	more	dense.	It'll	keep	getting	more	and	more	dense	as	he	travels onward.	It'll	be	really	subtle;	every	day	will	be	slightly	darker	than	the last.	Too	subtle	to	notice.”
Venkat	sighed.	“He'll	go	hundreds	of	kilometers,	wondering	why	his solar	panel	efficiency	is	going	down,	before	he's	notices	any	visibility problems.	And	the	storm	is	moving	west	as	he	moves	east.	He'll	be	too deep	in	to	get	out.”
“Are	we	just	watching	a	tragedy	play	out?”	Cathy	asked.
“There's	always	hope,”	Venkat	said.	“Maybe	he'll	figure	it	out	faster
than	we	think	and	turn	around	in	time.	Maybe	the	storm	will	dissipate unexpectedly.	Maybe	he'll	find	a	way	to	keep	his	life	support	going	on less	energy	than	we	thought	was	possible.	Mark	Watney	is	now	an	expert at	surviving	on	Mars.	If	anyone	can	do	it,	it's	him.”
“Twelve	days,”	Cathy	said	to	the	camera.	“All	of	Earth	is	watching, but	powerless	to	help.”


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	462

Another	uneventful	sol.	Tomorrow	is	an	Air	Day,	so	this	is	kind	of	my Friday	night.
I'm	about	half-way	through	Mawrth	Vallis	now.	Just	as	I'd	hoped,	the going	has	been	easy.	No	major	elevation	changes.	Hardly	any	obstacles.
Just	smooth	sand	with	rocks	smaller	than	half	a	meter.
You	may	be	wondering	how	I	navigate.	When	I	went	to	Pathfinder,	I watched	Phobos	transit	the	sky	to	figure	out	the	east-west	axis.	But Pathfinder	was	an	easy	trip	compared	to	this,	and	I	did	it	mostly	with landmarks.
I	can't	get	away	with	that	this	time.	My	“map”	(such	as	it	is)	consists of	satellite	images	far	too	low-resolution	to	be	of	any	use.	They	just	never expected	me	to	be	out	this	far.	The	only	reason	I	had	high-res	images	of the	Pathfinder	region	is	because	they	were	included	for	landing	purposes; in	case	Martinez	had	to	land	way	long	of	our	target.
So	this	time	around,	I	needed	a	reliable	way	to	fix	my	position	on Mars.
Latitude	and	Longitude.	That's	the	key.	The	first	is	easy.	Ancient sailors	on	Earth	figured	that	one	out	right	away.	Earth's	23.5	degree	axis points	at	Polaris.	Mars	has	a	tilt	of	just	over	25	degrees,	so	it's	pointed	at Deneb.
Making	a	sextant	isn't	hard.	All	you	need	is	a	tube	to	look	through,	a string,	a	weight,	and	something	with	degree	markings.	I	made	it	in	under an	hour.
So	I	go	out	every	night	with	a	home-made	sextant	and	sight	Deneb.
It's	kind	of	silly	if	you	think	about	it.	I'm	in	my	space	suit	on	Mars	and I'm	navigating	with	16th	century	tools.	But	hey,	they	work.
Longitude	is	a	different	matter.	On	Earth,	the	earliest	way	to	work	out longitude	required	them	to	know	the	exact	time,	then	compare	it	to	the sun's	position	in	the	sky.	The	hard	part	for	them	back	then	was	inventing a	clock	that	would	work	on	a	boat	(pendulums	don't	work	on	boats).	All the	top	scientific	minds	of	the	age	worked	on	the	problem.
Fortunately,	I	have	accurate	clocks.	There	are	four	computers	in	my immediate	line	of	sight	right	now.	And	I	have	Phobos.
Because	Phobos	is	ridiculously	close	to	Mars,	it	orbits	the	planet	in less	than	one	Martian	day.	So	it	travels	west	to	east	(unlike	the	sun	and Deimos)	and	sets	every	11	hours.	And	naturally,	it	moves	in	a	very predictable	pattern.
I	spend	13	hours	every	sol	just	sitting	around	while	the	solar	panels charge	the	batteries.	Phobos	is	guaranteed	to	set	at	least	once	during	that time.	I	note	the	time	when	it	does.	Then	I	plug	it	in	to	a	nasty	formula	I worked	out	and	I	know	my	longitude.
So,	working	out	longitude	requires	Phobos	to	set,	and	working	out latitude	requires	it	to	be	night	so	I	can	sight	Deneb.	It's	not	a	very	fast system.	But	I	only	need	it	once	a	day.	I	work	out	my	location	when	I'm parked,	and	account	for	it	in	the	next	day's	travel.	It's	kind	of	a	successive approximation	thing.	So	far,	it's	been	working.


Mindy	Park	zoomed	in	on	the	latest	satellite	photo	with	practiced ease.	Watney's	encampment	was	visible	in	the	center,	the	solar	cells	laid out	in	a	circular	pattern	as	was	his	habit.
The	bedroom	was	inflated.	Checking	the	timestamp	on	the	image,	it was	from	noon	local	time.	She	quickly	found	the	status	report;	Watney always	placed	it	close	to	the	rover	when	rocks	were	in	abundance,	usually to	the	north.
To	save	time,	Mindy	had	taught	herself	Morse	Code	so	she	wouldn't have	to	look	each	letter	up	every	morning.	Opening	an	email,	she addressed	it	to	the	ever-growing	list	of	people	who	wanted	Watney's	daily status	message.
“ON	TRACK	FOR	SOL	495	ARRIVAL.”
She	frowned	and	added	“Note:	5	sols	until	Tau	Event	entry.”
LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	466
Mawrth	Vallis	was	fun	while	it	lasted.	I'm	in	Arabia	Terra	now.
I	just	entered	the	edge	of	it,	if	my	latitude	and	longitude	calculations are	correct.	But	even	without	the	math,	it's	pretty	obvious	the	terrain	is changing.
For	the	last	two	sols,	I've	spent	almost	all	my	time	on	an	incline, working	my	way	up	the	back	wall	of	Mawrth	Vallis.	It	was	a	gentle	rise, but	a	constant	one.	I'm	at	a	much	higher	altitude	now.	Adicalia	Planitia (where	the	lonely	Hab	is	hanging	out)	is	3000m	below	elevation	zero,	and Arabia	Terra	is	500m	below.	So	I've	gone	up	two	and	a	half	kilometers.
Want	to	know	what's	at	elevation	zero?	On	Earth,	it's	sea	level. Obviously,	that	won't	work	on	Mars.	So	lab-coated	geeks	got	together	and decided	Mars's	elevation	zero	is	wherever	the	air	pressure	is	610.5 Pascals.	That's	about	500	meters	up	from	where	I	am	right	now.
Now	things	get	tricky.	In	Acidalia	Planitia,	if	I	got	off-course,	I	could just	point	in	the	right	direction	based	on	new	data.	Later,	in	Mawrth Vallis,	it	was	impossible	to	....	it	up.	I	just	had	to	follow	the	canyon.
Now	I'm	in	a	rougher	neighborhood.	The	kind	of	neighborhood	where you	keep	your	rover	doors	locked,	and	never	come	to	a	complete	stop	at intersections.	Well,	not	really,	but	it's	bad	to	get	off-course	here.
Arabia	Terra	has	large,	brutal	craters	that	I	have	to	drive	around.	If	I navigate	poorly,	I'll	end	up	at	the	edge	of	one.	I	can't	just	drive	down	one side	and	up	the	other.	Rising	in	elevation	costs	a	ton	of	energy.	On	flat ground,	I	can	make	90km	per	day.	On	a	steep	slope,	I'd	be	lucky	to	get 40km.	Plus,	driving	on	a	slope	is	dangerous.	One	mistake	and	I	could	roll the	rover.	I	don't	even	want	to	think	about	that.
Yes,	I'll	eventually	have	to	drive	down	in	to	Schiaparelli.	No	way around	that.	I'll	have	to	be	really	careful.
Anyway,	if	I	end	up	at	the	edge	of	a	crater	I'll	have	to	backtrack	to somewhere	useful.	And	it's	a	damn	maze	of	craters	out	here.	I'll	have	to be	on	my	guard;	observant	at	all	times.	I'll	need	to	navigate	with landmarks	as	well	as	latitude	and	longitude.
My	first	challenge	is	to	pass	between	the	craters	Rutherford	and Trouvelot.	It	shouldn't	be	too	hard.	They're	100km	apart.	Even	I	can't ....	that	up,	right?
Right?
LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	468
I	managed	to	thread	the	needle	between	Rutherford	and	Trouvelot nicely.	Admittedly,	the	needle	was	a	100km	wide,	but	hey.
I'm	now	enjoying	my	fourth	Air	Day	of	the	trip.	I've	been	on	the	road for	20	sols.	So	far,	I'm	right	on	schedule.	According	to	my	maps,	I've traveled	1,440km.	Not	quite	halfway	there,	but	almost.
I've	been	gathering	soil	and	rock	samples	from	each	place	I	camp.	I did	the	same	thing	on	my	way	to	Pathfinder.	But	this	time,	I	know NASA's	watching	me.	So	I'm	labeling	each	sample	by	the	current	sol. They'll	know	my	location	a	hell	of	a	lot	more	accurately	than	I	do.	They can	correlate	the	samples	with	their	locations	later.
It	might	be	a	wasted	effort.	The	MAV	isn't	going	to	have	much	weight allowance	when	I	launch.	To	intercept	Hermes,	it'll	have	to	reach	escape velocity,	but	it	was	only	designed	to	get	to	orbit.	The	only	way	to	get	it going	fast	enough	is	to	lose	a	lot	of	weight.
At	least	that	jury-rigging	will	be	NASA's	job	to	work	out,	not	mine. Once	I	get	to	the	MAV,	I'll	be	back	in	contact	with	them	and	they	can	tell me	what	modifications	to	make.
They'll	probably	say	“Thanks	for	gathering	samples.	But	leave	them behind.	And	one	of	your	arms,	too.	Whichever	one	you	like	least.”	But	on the	off-chance	I	can	bring	them,	I'm	gathering	them.
The	next	few	days	travel	should	be	easy.	The	next	major	obstacle	is
Marth	Crater.	It's	right	in	my	straight-line	path	toward	Schiaparelli.	It'll cost	me	a	hundred	kilometers	or	so	to	go	around,	but	it	can't	be	helped. I'll	try	to	aim	for	the	southern	edge.	The	closer	I	get	to	the	rim	the	less time	I	waste	going	around	it.


“Did	you	read	today's	updates?”	Lewis	asked,	pulling	her	meal	from the	microwave.
“Yeah,”	Martinez	said,	sipping	his	drink.
She	sat	across	the	Rec	table	from	him.	Carefully	opening	the steaming	package,	she	let	it	cool	for	a	moment	before	eating.	“Mark entered	the	dust	storm	yesterday.” “Yeah,	I	saw	that,”	he	said.
“We	need	to	face	the	possibility	that	he	won't	make	it	to
Schiaparelli,”	Lewis	said.	“If	that	happens,	we	need	to	keep	morale	up.
We	still	have	a	long	way	to	go	before	we	get	home.”
“He	was	dead	before,”	Martinez	said.	“It	was	rough	on	morale,	but	we soldiered	on.	Besides,	he	won't	die.”
“It's	pretty	bleak,	Rick,”	Lewis	said.	“He's	already	50km	in	to	the storm,	and	he'll	go	another	90km	per	sol.	He'll	get	in	too	deep	to	recover soon.”
Martinez	shook	his	head.	“He'll	pull	through,	Commander.	Have faith.”
She	smiled	forlornly.	“Rick,	you	know	I'm	not	religious.”
“I	know,”	he	said.	“I'm	not	talking	about	faith	in	God,	I'm	talking about	faith	in	Mark	Watney.	Look	at	all	the	shit	Mars	has	thrown	at	him, and	he's	still	alive.	He'll	survive	this.	I	don't	know	how,	but	he	will.	He's	a clever	son-of-a-bitch.”
Lewis	took	a	bite	of	her	food.	“I	hope	you're	right.” “Want	to	bet	$100?”	Martinez	said	with	a	smile.
“Of	course	not,”	Lewis	said.
“Damn	right,”	he	smiled.
“I'd	never	bet	on	a	crewmate	dying,”	Lewis	said.	“But	that	doesn't mean	I	think	he'll-”
“Blah	blah	blah,”	Martinez	interrupted.	“Deep	down,	you	think	he'll
make	it.”


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	473

My	fifth	Air	Day,	and	things	are	going	well.	I	should	be	skimming south	of	Marth	Crater	tomorrow.	It'll	get	easier	after	that.
I'm	in	the	middle	of	a	bunch	of	craters	that	form	a	triangle.	I'm calling	it	the	Watney	Triangle	because	after	what	I've	been	through,	shit on	Mars	should	be	named	after	me.
Trouvelot,	Becquerel,	and	Marth	form	the	points	of	the	triangle,	with 5	other	major	craters	along	the	sides.	Normally	this	wouldn't	be	a problem	at	all,	but	with	my	extremely	rough	navigation,	I	could	easily end	up	at	the	lip	of	one	of	them	and	have	to	backtrack.
After	Marth,	I'll	be	out	of	the	Watney	Triangle	(yeah,	I'm	liking	that name	more	and	more).	Then	I	can	beeline	toward	Schiaparelli	with impunity.	There'll	still	be	plenty	of	craters	in	the	way,	but	they're comparatively	small	and	going	around	them	won't	cost	much	time. Progress	has	been	great.	Arabia	Terra	is	certainly	rockier	than Acidalia	Planitia,	but	nowhere	near	as	bad	as	I'd	feared.	I've	been	able	to drive	over	most	of	the	rocks,	and	around	the	ones	that	are	too	big.
I	have	1435km	left	to	go.	Ares	4's	MAV	is	in	the	southwest	part	of Schiaparelli.	The	primary	goal	of	Ares	4	is	to	get	a	look	at	the	long-term effects	of	Martian	weather	on	deep	layers	of	strata	exposed	by	the	crater. At	least,	that	was	the	original	plan.	I'll	be	taking	their	MAV	and Commander	Lewis	hasn't	given	Hermes	back,	so	we've	ruined	everything. They'll	probably	just	send	another	MAV	and	wait	for	the	next	window.
I	did	some	research	on	Schiaparelli	and	found	some	good	news.	The best	way	in	is	right	in	my	direct-line	path.	I	won't	have	to	drive	the perimeter	at	all.	And	the	way	in	is	easy	to	find,	even	when	you	suck	at navigating.	The	northwest	rim	has	a	smaller	crater	on	it,	and	that's	the landmark	I'll	be	looking	for.	To	the	southwest	of	that	little	crater	is	a gentle	slope	in	to	Schiaparelli	Basin.
The	little	crater	doesn't	have	a	name.	At	least,	not	on	the	maps	I	have.
So	I	dub	it	“Entrance	Crater.”	Because	I	can.
In	other	news,	my	equipment	is	starting	to	show	signs	of	age.	Not surprising,	considering	it's	way	the	hell	past	its	expiration	date.	For	the past	two	sols,	the	batteries	have	taken	longer	to	recharge.	The	solar	cells just	aren't	producing	as	much	wattage	as	before.	It's	not	a	big	deal,	I	just need	to	charge	a	little	longer.
LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	474
Well,	I	....	it	up.
It	was	bound	to	happen	eventually.	I	navigated	badly	and	ended	up	at the	ridge	of	Marth	Crater.	With	it	being	100km	wide,	I	can't	see	the whole	thing,	so	I	don't	know	where	on	the	circle	I	am.
The	ridge	runs	perpendicular	to	the	direction	I	was	going.	So	I	have no	clue	which	way	I	should	go.	And	I	don't	want	to	take	the	long	way around	if	I	can	avoid	it.	Originally	I	wanted	to	go	around	to	the	south,	but north	is	just	as	likely	to	be	the	best	path	now	that	I'm	off-course.
I'll	have	to	wait	for	another	Phobos	transit	to	get	my	longitude,	and I'll	need	to	wait	for	nightfall	to	sight	Deneb	for	my	latitude.	So	I'm	done driving	for	the	day.	I'd	made	70km	out	of	the	90km	I	usually	do.	So	it's not	too	much	wasted	potential	driving.
Marth	isn't	too	steep.	I	could	probably	just	drive	down	one	side	and up	the	other.	It's	big	enough	that	I'd	end	up	camping	inside	it	one	night. But	I	don't	want	to	take	unnecessary	risks.	Slopes	are	bad	and	should	be avoided.	I	gave	myself	plenty	of	buffer	time,	so	I'm	going	to	play	it	safe.
I'm	ending	today's	drive	early	and	setting	up	for	recharge.	Probably	a good	idea	anyway	with	the	solar	cells	acting	up;	it'll	give	them	more	time to	work.	They	underperformed	again	last	night.	I	checked	all	the connections	and	made	sure	there	wasn't	any	dust	on	them,	but	they	still just	aren't	100%.
LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	475

I'm	in	trouble.
I	watched	two	Phobos	transits	yesterday	and	sighted	Deneb	last	night. I	worked	out	my	location	as	accurately	as	I	could,	and	it	wasn't	what	I wanted	to	see.	As	far	as	I	can	tell,	I	hit	Marth	Crater	dead-on.
Craaaaap.
This	is	the	worst	case	scenario.	I	can	go	north	or	south,	and	they'll	be about	the	same.	It'll	cost	at	least	a	day	to	correct.	All	because	I	aimed wrong	yesterday.
That's	frustrating,	but	it's	not	why	I'm	in	trouble.
I	still	wanted	to	be	efficient,	and	I	wasn't	100%	sure	where	I	was.	So	I took	a	little	walk	this	morning.	It	was	over	a	kilometer	to	the	peak	of	the rim.	That's	the	sort	of	walk	people	do	on	Earth	without	thinking	twice, but	in	an	EVA	suit	it's	an	ordeal.
I	can't	wait	till	I	have	grandchildren.	“When	I	was	younger,	I	had	to walk	to	the	rim	of	a	crater.	Uphill!	In	an	EVA	suit!	On	Mars,	ya	little shit!	Ya	hear	me?	Mars!”
Anyway,	I	got	up	to	the	rim	and	damn,	it's	a	beautiful	sight.	From	my high	vantage	point,	I	got	a	stunning	panorama.	I	figured	I	might	be	able to	see	the	far	side	of	Marth	Crater,	and	maybe	work	out	if	north	or	south was	the	best	way	around	it.
But	I	couldn't	see	the	far	side.	There	was	a	haze	in	the	air.	It's	not uncommon;	Mars	has	weather	and	wind	and	dust,	after	all.	But	it	seemed hazier	than	it	should.	I'm	accustomed	to	the	wide-open	expanses	of Acidalia	Planitia,	my	former	prairie	home.
Then	it	got	weirder.	I	turned	around	and	looked	back	toward	the	rover and	trailer.	Everything	was	where	I'd	left	it	(very	few	car	thieves	on Mars).	But	the	view	seemed	a	lot	clearer.
I	looked	east	across	Marth	again.	Then	west	to	the	horizon.	Then	east, then	west.	Each	turn	required	me	to	rotate	my	whole	body,	EVA	suits being	what	they	are.
Yesterday,	I	passed	a	crater.	It's	about	50km	west	of	here.	It's	just visible	on	the	horizon.	But	looking	east,	I	can't	see	anywhere	near	that far.	Marth	Crater	is	110km	wide.	With	a	visibility	of	50km,	I	should	at least	be	able	to	see	a	distinct	curvature	of	the	rim.	But	I	can't.
The	....?
At	first,	I	didn't	know	what	to	make	of	it.	But	the	lack	of	symmetry bothered	me.	And		I've	learned	to	be	suspicious	of	everything.	That's when	a	bunch	of	stuff	started	to	dawn	on	me:
1)	The	only	explanation	for	asymmetrical	visibility	is	a	dust	storm.
2)	Dust	storms	reduce	the	effectiveness	of	solar	cells.
3)	My	solar	cells	have	been	slowly	losing	effectiveness	for	several sols.
From	this,	I	concluded	the	following:
1) I've	been	in	a	dust	storm	for	several	sols. 2) Shit.
Not	only	am	I	in	a	dust	storm,	but	it	gets	thicker	as	I	approach
Schiaparelli.	A	few	hours	ago,	I	was	worried	because	I	had	to	go	around Marth	Crater.	Now	I'm	going	to	have	to	go	around	something	a	fuckload bigger.
And	I	have	to	hustle.	Dust	storms	move.	Sitting	still	means	I'll	likely get	overwhelmed.	But	which	way	do	I	go?	It's	no	longer	an	issue	of	trying to	be	efficient.	If	I	go	the	wrong	way	this	time,	I'll	eat	dust	and	die.
I	don't	have	satellite	imagery.	I	have	no	way	of	knowing	the	size	or shape	of	the	storm,	or	its	heading.	Man,	I'd	give	anything	for	a	5-minute conversation	with	NASA.	Now	that	I	think	of	it,	NASA	must	be	shitting bricks	watching	this	play	out.
I'm	on	the	clock.	I	have	to	figure	out	how	to	figure	out	what	I	need	to know	about	the	storm.	And	I	have	to	do	it	now.
And	right	this	second	nothing	comes	to	mind.
Mindy	trudged	to	her	computer.	Today's	shift	began	at	2:10pm.	Her schedule	matched	Watney's	every	day.	She	slept	when	he	slept.	Watney simply	slept	at	night	on	Mars,	while	Mindy	had	to	drift	40	minutes forward	every	day,	taping	aluminum	foil	to	her	windows	to	get	any	sleep at	all.
She	brought	up	the	most	recent	satellite	images.	She	cocked	an eyebrow.	He	had	not	broken	camp	yet.	Usually	he	drove	in	the	early morning,	as	soon	as	it	was	light	enough	to	navigate.	Then	he	capitalized on	the	midday	sun	to	maximize	recharging.
But	today,	he	had	not	moved,	and	it	was	well	past	morning.
She	checked	around	the	rovers	and	bedroom	for	a	message.	She	found it	in	the	usual	place	(north	of	the	campsite).	Reading	the	Morse	code,	her eyes	widened.
“DUST	STORM.	MAKING	PLAN.”
Fumbling	with	her	cell	phone,	she	dialed	Venkat's	personal	number.


	 
Chapter	23

LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	476

I	think	I	can	work	this	out.
I'm	on	the	very	edge	of	a	storm.	I	don't	know	its	size	or	heading.	But it's	moving,	and	that's	something	I	can	take	advantage	of.	I	don't	have	to wander	around	exploring	it.	It'll	come	to	me.
The	storm	is	just	dust	in	the	air;	it's	not	dangerous	to	the	rovers.	I	can think	of	it	as	“Percent	power	loss.”	I	checked	yesterdays	power generation	and	it	was	97%	of	optimal.	So	right	now,	it's	a	3%	storm.
I	need	to	make	progress	and	I	need	to	regenerate	oxygen.	Those	are my	two	main	goals.	I	use	20%	of	my	overall	power	to	reclaim	oxygen (when	I	stop	for	Air	Days).	If	I	end	up	in	an	81%	part	of	the	storm,	I'll	be in	real	trouble.	I'll	run	out	of	oxygen	even	if	I	dedicate	all	available power	to	it.	That's	the	fatal	scenario.	But	really,	it's	fatal	much	earlier than	that.	I	need	power	to	move	or	I'll	be	stranded	until	the	storm	passes or	dissipates.	That	could	be	months.
The	more	power	I	generate,	the	more	I'll	have	for	movement.	With clear	skies,	I	dedicate	80%	of	my	total	power	toward	movement.	I	get 90km	per	sol	this	way.	So	Right	now,	at	3%	loss,	I'm	getting	3.3km	less than	I	should.
It's	ok	to	lose	some	driving	distance	per	sol.	I	have	plenty	of	time,	but I	can't	let	myself	get	too	deep	in	the	storm	or	I'll	never	be	able	to	get	out.
At	the	very	least,	I	need	to	travel	faster	than	the	storm.	If	I	can	go faster,	I	can	maneuver	around	it	without	being	enveloped.	I	need	to	find out	how	fast	it's	moving.
I	can	do	that	by	sitting	here	for	a	sol.	I	can	compare	tomorrow's wattage	to	today's.	All	I	have	to	do	is	make	sure	to	compare	the	same times	of	day.	Then	I'd	know	how	fast	the	storm	is	moving,	at	least	in terms	of	percent	power	loss.
But	I	need	to	know	the	shape	of	the	storm,	too.
Dust	storms	are	big.	They	can	be	thousands	of	kilometers	across.	So
when	I	work	my	way	around	it,	I'll	need	to	know	which	way	to	go.	I'll want	to	move	perpendicular	to	the	storm's	movement,	and	in	whatever direction	has	less	storm.
So	here's	my	plan:
Right	now,	I	can	go	86km	(because	I	couldn't	get	a	full	battery yesterday).	I'm	going	to	leave	a	solar	cell	here	and	drive	40km	due	south. Then	I'll	drop	off	another	solar	cell	and	drive	another	40km	due	south.	I'll have	three	points	of	reference	across	80km.
The	next	day,	I'll	go	back	to	collect	the	cells	and	get	the	data.	By comparing	the	wattage	at	the	same	time	of	day	in	those	three	locations, I'll	learn	the	shape	of	the	storm.		If	the	storm	is	thicker	to	the	south,	I'll go	north	to	get	around	it.	If	it's	thicker	north,	I'll	go	south.
I'm	hoping	to	go	south.	Schiaparelli	is	southeast	of	me.	Going	north would	add	a	lot	of	time	to	my	total	trip.
There's	one	slight	problem	with	my	plan:	I	don't	have	any	way	to “record”	the	wattage	from	an	abandoned	solar	cell.	I	can	easily	track	and log	wattage	with	the	rover	computer,	but	I	need	something	I	can	drop	off and	leave	behind.	I	can't	just	take	readings	as	I	drive	along.	I	need readings	at	the	same	time	in	different	places.
So	I'm	going	to	spend	today	working	on	some	mad	science.	I	have	to make	something	that	can	log	wattage.	Something	I	can	leave	behind	with a	single	solar	cell.
Since	I'm	stuck	here	for	the	day	anyway,	I'll	leave	the	solar	cells	out.	I may	as	well	get	a	full	battery	out	of	it.


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	477

It	took	all	day	yesterday	and	today,	but	I	think	I'm	ready	to	measure this	storm.
When	I	packed	for	this	road	trip,	I	made	sure	to	bring	all	my	kits	and tools.	Just	in	case	I	had	to	repair	the	rover	en-route.
I	made	the	bedroom	in	to	a	lab.	I	stacked	my	supply	containers	to form	a	rudimentary	table,	and	used	a	sample	box	as	a	stool.
I	needed	a	way	to	track	the	time	of	day	and	the	wattage	of	the	solar cell.	The	tricky	part	is	logging	it.	And	the	solution	is	the	extra	EVA	suit	I brought	along.
The	cool	thing	about	EVA	suits	is	they	have	cameras	recording everything	they	see.	There's	a	camera	on	the	right	arm	(or	the	left	if	the astronaut	is	left	handed),	and	one	above	the	faceplate.	A	time-stamp	is burned	in	to	the	lower	left	corner	of	the	image,	just	like	the	shaky	home videos	Dad	used	to	take.
My	electronics	kit	has	several	power	meters.	So	I	figure:	why	make my	own	logging	system?	I	can	just	film	the	power	meter	all	day	long.
So	that's	what	I	set	up.
First,	I	harvested	the	cameras	from	my	spare	EVA	suit.	I	had	to	be careful;	I	didn't	want	to	ruin	the	suit.	It's	my	only	spare.	I	had	to	get	the cameras	and	the	lines	leading	to	their	memory	chips.
I	put	a	power	meter	in	to	a	small	sample	container,	then	glued	a camera	to	the	underside	of	the	lid.	When	I	sealed	up	the	container,	the camera	was	properly	recording	the	readout	of	the	power	meter.
For	testing,	I	used	rover	power.	How	will	it	get	power	once	I	abandon it	on	the	surface?	Well,	it	turns	out	it's	going	to	be	attached	to	a	2	square meter	solar	cell.	That'll	be	plenty.	And	I	put	a	small	rechargeable	battery in	the	container	to	tide	it	over	during	nighttime	(again,	harvested	from the	spare	EVA	suit).
The	next	problem	is	heat,	or	the	lack	thereof.	As	soon	as	I	take	this thing	out	of	the	rover,	it'll	start	cooling	down	mighty	fast.	Once	it	gets too	cold,	the	electronics	will	stop	working	entirely.
So	I	needed	a	heat	source.	And	my	electronics	kit	provided	the answer.	Resistors.	Lots	and	lots	of	them.	The	camera	and	power	meter only	need	a	tiny	fraction	of	what	a	solar	cell	can	make.	So	I'm	dumping the	rest	of	the	energy	through	resistors.
Resistors	heat	up.	It's	what	they	do.		There's	my	heat	source.
I	made	and	tested	two	“power	loggers”,	and	confirmed	the	images were	being	properly	recorded.
Then	I	had	an	EVA.	I	detached	two	of	my	solar	cells	and	hooked	them up	to	the	power	loggers.	I	let	them	log	happily	for	an	hour,	then	brought them	back	in	to	check	the	results.	They	worked	great.
It's	getting	toward	nightfall	now.	Tomorrow	morning,	I'll	leave	one power	logger	behind,	and	head	south.
While	I	was	working,	I	left	the	Oxygenator	going	(why	not?).	So	I'm all	stocked	up	on	O2	and	good	to	go.
The	solar	cell	efficiency	for	today	was	92.5%.	Compared	to yesterday's	97%.	So	right	now,	the	storm	is	moving	at	4.5%	per	sol.	If	I were	to	stay	here	another	16	sols,	it	would	get	dark	enough	to	kill	me. Just	as	well	I'm	not	going	to	stay	here.


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	478

Everything	went	as	planned	today.	No	hiccups.	I	can't	tell	if	I'm driving	deeper	in	to	the	storm	or	out	of	it.	It's	hard	to	tell	if	the	ambient light	is	less	or	more	than	it	was	yesterday.	The	human	brain	works	hard	to abstract	that	out.
I	left	a	power-logger	behind	when	I	started	out.	Then,	after	40km travel	due	south,	I	had	a	quick	EVA	to	set	up	another.	Now	I've	gone	the full	80km,	set	up	my	solar	cells	for	charging,	and	I'm	logging	the wattage.
Tomorrow,	I'll	have	to	reverse	course	and	pick	up	the	power-loggers.
It	may	be	dangerous;	I'll	be	driving	right	back	in	to	a	known	storm	area.
But	the	risk	is	worth	the	gain.
Also,	have	I	mentioned	I'm	sick	of	potatoes?	Because,	by	God,	I	am sick	of	potatoes.	If	I	ever	return	to	Earth,	I'm	going	to	buy	a	nice	little home	in	Western	Australia.	Because	Western	Australia	is	on	the	opposite side	of	Earth	from	Idaho.
I	bring	it	up	because	I	dined	on	a	meal	pack	today.	I	had	saved	5 packs	for	special	occasions.	I	ate	the	first	of	them	29	sols	ago	when	I	left for	Schiaparelli.	I	totally	forgot	to	eat	the	second	when	I	reached	the	halfway	point	9	sols	ago.	So	I'm	enjoying	my	belated	half-way	feast.
It's	probably	more	accurate	to	eat	it	today	anyway.	Who	knows	how long	it'll	take	me	to	go	around	this	storm.	And	if	I	end	up	stuck	in	the storm	and	doomed	to	die,	I'm	totally	eating	the	other	earmarked	meals.


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	479

Have	you	ever	taken	the	wrong	freeway	entrance?	You	need	to	drive to	the	next	exit	to	turn	around,	but	you	hate	every	inch	of	travel	because you're	going	away	from	your	goal.
I	felt	like	that	all	day.	I'm	now	back	where	I	started	yesterday morning.	Yuk.
Along	the	way,	I	picked	up	the	power-logger	I'd	left	behind	at	the half-way	point.	Just	now	I	brought	in	the	one	I'd	left	here	yesterday.
Both	loggers	worked	they	way	I'd	hoped.	I	downloaded	each	of	their video	recordings	to	a	laptop	and	advanced	them	to	noon.	Finally	I	had solar	efficiency	readings	from	three	locations	along	an	80km	line,	all from	the	same	time	of	day.
As	of	noon	yesterday,	the	northern-most	logger	showed	12.3% efficiency	loss,	the	middle	one	was	a	9.5%	loss,	and	the	rover	recorded	a 6.4%	loss	at	its	southernmost	location.	It	paints	a	pretty	clear	picture:	the storm	front	runs	northwest	to	southeast.	And	I	already	worked	out	it's traveling	west.
The	best	way	to	avoid	it	is	to	go	south.
Finally,	some	good	news!	South	is	what	I	wanted.	I	won't	lose	much time.
Sigh...	I	have	to	drive	the	same	god	damned	path	a	third	time tomorrow.


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	480

I	think	I'm	getting	ahead	of	the	storm.
Having	traveled	along	Mars	Highway	1	all	day,	I'm	back	at	my campsite	from	yesterday.	Tomorrow,	I'll	finally	make	real	headway again.	I	was	done	driving	and	had	the	camp	set	up	by	noon.	The efficiency	loss	here	is	15.6%.	Compared	to	the	17%	loss	at	yesterday's camp,	this	means	I	can	outrun	the	storm	as	long	as	I	keep	heading	south.
Hopefully.
The	storm	is	probably	circular.	They	usually	are.	But	I	could	just	be driving	in	to	an	alcove.	If	that's	the	case,	I'm	just	....	dead,	ok?There's	only	so	much	I	can	do.
I'll	know	soon	enough.	If	the	storm	is	circular,	I	should	get	better	and better	efficiency	every	day	until	I'm	back	to	100%.	One	I	reach	100%	that means	I'm	completely	south	of	the	storm	and	I	can	start	going	east	again.
We'll	see.
If	there	were	no	storm,	I'd	be	going	directly	southwest	toward	my goal.	As	it	is,	going	only	south,	I'm	not	nearly	as	fast.	I'm	traveling	90km per	day	as	usual,	but	I	only	get	37km	closer	to	Schiaparelli	because Pythagoras	is	a	.....	I	don't	know	when	I'll	finally	clear	the	storm	and	be able	to	beeline	to	Schiaparelli	again.	But	one	thing's	for	sure:	My	plan	to arrive	on	Sol	495	is	boned.
Sol	549.	That's	when	they	come	for	me.	If	I	miss	it,	I'll	spend	the	rest of	my	very	short	life	here.	And	I	still	have	the	MAV	to	modify	before then,	too.
Sheesh.
LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	482
Air	day.	A	time	for	relaxation	and	speculation.
For	relaxation,	I	read	100	pages	of	Agatha	Christie's	Evil	Under	the Sun	courtesy	of	Johanssen's	digital	book	collection.	I	think	Linda Marshall	is	the	murderer.
As	for	speculation,	I	speculated	on	when	the	hell	I'll	get	past	this ....	storm.
I'm	still	going	due	south	every	day;	and	still	dealing	with	efficiency loss	(though	I'm	keeping	ahead	of	it).	Every	day	of	this	crap	I'm	only getting	37km	closer	to	the	MAV	instead	of	90.	Pissing	me	off.
I	considered	skipping	the	Air	Day.	I	could	go	another	couple	of	days before	I	ran	out	of	oxygen,	and	getting	away	from	the	storm	is	pretty important.	But	I	decided	against	it.	I'm	ahead	of	the	storm	enough	that	I can	afford	one	day	of	no	movement.	And	I	don't	know	if	a	couple	more days	would	help.	Who	knows	how	far	the	storm	goes	south?
Well,	NASA	probably	knows.	And	the	news	stations	back	on	Earth	are probably	showing	it.	And	there's	probably	a	website	like	www.watchmark-watney-die.com.	So	there's	like	a	hundred	million	people	or	so	who know	exactly	how	far	south	it	goes.
But	I'm	not	one	of	them.
LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	484
Finally!
I	am	FINALLY	past	the	god	damned	storm.	Today's	power	regen	was 100%.	No	more	dust	in	the	air.	With	the	storm	moving	perpendicular	to my	direction	of	travel,	it	means	I'm	south	of	the	southernmost	point	of the	cloud	(presuming	it's	a	circular	storm.	If	it's	not	then	.....)
Starting	tomorrow,	I	can	go	directly	toward	Schiaparelli.	Which	is good,	cause	I	lost	a	lot	of	time.	I	went	540km	due	south	while	avoiding that	storm.	I'm	catastrophically	off	course.
Mind	you,	it	hasn't	been	that	bad.	I'm	well	in	to	Terra	Meridiani	now, and	the	driving	is	a	little	easier	here	than	the	rugged	ass-kicking	terrain of	Arabia	Terra.	Schiaparelli	is	almost	due	east,	and	if	my	sextant	and Phobos	calculations	are	correct,	I've	got	another	1030km	to	get	there.
Accounting	for	air	days	and	presuming	90km	of	travel	per	sol,	I should	arrive	on	Sol	505.	Not	too	bad,	really.	The	Nearly-Mark-Killin' storm	only	ended	up	delaying	me	by	7	sols.
I'll	still	have	44	sols	to	do	whatever	MAV	modifications	NASA	has	in mind.
LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	487
I	have	an	interesting	opportunity	here.	And	by	“opportunity”	I	mean Opportunity.
I	got	pushed	so	far	off	course,	I'm	actually	not	far	from	the	Mars Exploration	Rover	Opportunity.	It's	about	300km	away.	I	could	actually get	there	and	pull	a	Pathfinder	on	it.	It	would	take	about	4	sols.
Thing	is,	it's	not	worth	it.	I'm	only	13	sols	away	from	the	MAV.	Why go	out	of	my	way	to	dig	up	another	broken-ass	rover	to	use	as	a	makeshift radio	when	I'll	have	a	brand	new,	fully	functional	communication	system within	a	couple	of	weeks.
So,	while	it's	kind	of	neat	that	I'm	within	striking	range	of	another rover	(man	we	really	littered	this	planet	with	them,	didn't	we?)	it's	not relevant.
Besides,	I've	defiled	enough	future	historical	sites	for	now.


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	492

I	need	to	put	some	thought	in	to	the	bedroom.
Right	now,	I	can	only	have	it	set	up	when	I'm	inside	the	rover.	It attaches	to	the	airlock,	so	I	can't	get	out	if	it's	there.	During	my	road	trip that	didn't	matter,	because	I	had	to	furl	it	every	day	anyway.	But	once	I get	to	the	MAV,	I	won't	have	to	drive	around	anymore.	Each decompress/recompress	of	the	bedroom	stresses	the	seams	(I	learned	that lesson	the	hard	way	when	the	Hab	blew	up)	so	it's	best	if	I	can	find	a	way to	leave	it	out.
Holy	shit.	I	just	realized	I	actually	believe	I'll	get	to	the	MAV.	See what	I	did	there?	I	casually	talked	about	what	I'll	do	after	I	get	to	the MAV.	Like	it	was	nothing.	No	big	deal.	I'm	just	going	to	pop	over	to Schiaparelli	and	hang	with	the	MAV	there.
Nice.
Anyway,	I	don't	have	another	airlock.	I've	got	one	on	the	rover	and one	on	the	trailer	and	that's	it.	They're	firmly	fixed	in	place,	so	it's	not like	I	can	detach	one	and	attach	it	to	the	bedroom.
But	I	can	seal	the	bedroom	entirely.	I	don't	even	have	to	do	any
bullshit	hatchet	jobs	on	it.	The	airlock	attachment	point	has	a	flap	I	can unroll	seal	the	opening	with.	Remember,	I	stole	the	airlock	attachment from	a	pop-tent.	It's	an	emergency	feature	for	pressure	loss	while	in	the rover.	It'd	be	pretty	useless	if	it	couldn't	seal	itself	off.
Unfortunately,	as	an	emergency	device,	it	was	never	intended	to	be reusable.	The	idea	was	people	seal	themselves	in	the	pop	tent,	then	the rest	of	the	crew	drives	to	wherever	they	are	in	the	other	rover	and	rescues them.	The	crew	of	the	good	rover	detaches	the	pop	tent	from	the	breached rover,	and	re-attaches	it	to	theirs.	Then	they	cut	through	the	seal	from their	side	to	recover	their	crewmates.
To	make	sure	this	would	always	be	an	option,	mission	rules	dictated no	more	than	3	people	could	be	in	a	rover	at	once,	and	both	rovers	had	to be	fully	functional	or	we	couldn't	use	either.
So	here's	my	brilliant	plan:	I	won't	use	the	bedroom	as	a	bedroom anymore	once	I	get	to	the	MAV.	I'll	use	it	to	house	the	Oxygenator	and Atmospheric	Regulator.	Then	I'll	use	the	trailer	as	my	bedroom.	Neat,	eh?
The	trailer	has	tons	of	space.	I	put	a	fuckton	of	work	in	to	making	that happen.	The	balloon	gives	plenty	of	headroom.	Not	a	lot	of	floor	space, but	still	lots	of	vertical	area.
Also,	the	bedroom	has	several	valve	apertures	in	its	canvas.	I	have	the pop-tents	to	thank	for	that	again.	I	just	needed	swaths	of	canvas	so	I	stole it	from	wherever	I	could.	I	stole	a	lot	from	the	pop	tents,	and	they	had valve	apertures	(triple	redundant	ones,	actually).	NASA	wanted	to	make sure	the	emergency	shelter	allows	the	crew	on	the	outside	to	get	air	in	to the	crew	on	the	inside.
In	the	end,	I'll	have	the	bedroom	sealed	with	the	Oxygenator	and Atmospheric	Regulator	inside.	It'll	be	attached	to	the	trailer	via	hoses	to share	the	same	atmosphere	and	I'll	run	a	power	line	through	one	of	the hoses.	The	rover	will	serve	as	storage	(because	I	won't	need	to	get	to	the driving	controls	any	more)	and	the	trailer	will	be	completely	empty.	Then I'll	have	a	permanent	bedroom.	I'll	even	be	able	to	use	it	as	a	workshop for	whatever	MAV	modifications	I	need	to	do	on	parts	that	can	fit through	the	trailer's	airlock.
Of	course,	if	the	Atmospheric	Regulator	or	Oxygenator	have
problems,	I'll	need	to	cut	in	to	the	bedroom	to	get	to	them.	But	I've	been here	492	sols	and	they've	worked	fine	the	whole	time,	so	I'll	take	that risk.
LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	497
I'll	be	at	the	entrance	to	Schiaparelli	crater	tomorrow!
Presuming	nothing	goes	wrong,	that	is.	But	hey,	everything	else	has gone	smoothly	this	mission,	right?	(That	was	sarcasm.)
Today's	an	Air	Day	and	for	once,	I	don't	want	it.	I'm	so	close	to Schiaparelli,	I	can	taste	it.	I	guess	it	would	taste	like	sand,	mostly,	but that's	not	the	point.
Of	course,	that	won't	be	the	end	of	the	trip.	It'll	take	another	3	sols	to get	from	the	entrance	to	the	MAV,	but	hot	damn!	I'm	almost	there!
I	think	I	can	even	see	the	rim	of	Schiaparelli.	It's	way	the	hell	off	in the	distance	and	it	might	just	be	my	imagination.	It's	62km	away,	so	if I'm	seeing	it,	I'm	only	just	barely	seeing	it.
Tomorrow,	once	I	get	to	Entrance	Crater,	I'll	turn	south	and	enter	the Schiaparelli	Basin	via	the	“Entrance	Ramp.”	I	did	some	back-of-thenapkin	math	and	the	slope	should	be	pretty	safe.	The	elevation	change from	the	rim	to	the	basin	is	1.5km,	and	the	Ramp	is	at	least	45km	long.
That	makes	for	a	2-degree	grade.	No	problem.
Tomorrow	night,	I'll	sink	to	an	all	new	low!
Lemme	rephrase	that...
Tomorrow	night,	I'll	be	at	rock	bottom!
No,	that	doesn't	sound	good	either...
Tomorrow	night,	I'll	be	in	Giovanni	Schiaparelli's	favorite	hole! Ok,	I	admit	I'm	just	....	around	now.
For	millions	of	years,	the	rim	of	the	crater	had	been	under	constant attack	from	wind.	It	eroded	the	rocky	crest	like	a	river	cuts	through	a mountain	range.	After	aeons,	it	finally	breached	the	edge.
The	high	pressure	zone	created	by	the	wind	now	had	an	avenue	to drain.	The	breach	widened	more	and	more	with	each	passing	millennium. As	it	widened,	dust	and	sand	particles	carried	along	with	the	attack settled	in	the	basin	below.
Eventually,	a	balance	point	was	reached.	The	sand	had	piled	up	high enough	to	be	flush	with	the	land	outside	the	crater.	It	no	longer	built upward,	but	now	outward.	The	slope	lengthened	until	a	new	balance	point was	reached,	one	defined	by	the	complex	interactions	of	countless	tiny particles	and	their	ability	to	maintain	an	angled	shape.	Entrance	Ramp had	been	born.
The	weather	brought	dunes	and	desert	terrain.	Nearby	crater	impacts brought	rocks	and	boulders.	The	shape	became	uneven.
Gravity	did	its	work.	The	ramp	compressed	over	time.	But	it	did	not compress	evenly.	Differing	densities	shrunk	at	different	rates.	Some	areas became	hard	as	rock	while	others	remained	as	soft	as	talc.
While	providing	a	small	average	slope	into	the	crater,	the	ramp	itself was	rugged	and	bitterly	uneven.
Upon	reaching	Entrance	Crater,	the	lone	inhabitant	of	Mars	turned	his vehicle	toward	the	Schiaparelli	Basin.	The	difficult	terrain	was unexpected,	but	looked	no	worse	than	other	terrain	he	routinely navigated.
He	went	around	the	smaller	dunes,	and	carefully	crested	the	larger ones.	He	took	care	with	every	turn,	every	rise	or	fall	in	elevation,	and every	boulder	in	his	path.	He	thought	through	every	course	and considered	all	alternatives.
But	it	wasn't	enough.
The	rover,	while	descending	down	a	seemingly	ordinary	slope,	drove off	an	invisible	ridge.	The	dense,	hard	soil	suddenly	gave	way	to	soft powder.	With	the	entire	surface	covered	by	at	least	5cm	of	dust,	there were	no	visual	hints	to	the	sudden	change.
The	rover's	left	front	wheel	sank.	The	sudden	tilt	brought	the	right rear	wheel	completely	off	the	ground.	This	in	turn	put	more	weight	on	the left	rear	wheel,	which	slipped	from	it's	precarious	purchase	into	the powder	as	well.
Before	the	traveler	could	react,	the	rover	rolled	on	to	its	side.	As	it did,	the	solar	cells	neatly	stacked	on	the	roof	flew	off	and	scattered	like	a dropped	deck	of	cards.
The	trailer,	attached	to	the	rover	with	a	tow	clamp,	was	dragged along.	The	torsion	on	the	clamp	snapped	the	strong	composite	like	a brittle	twig.	The	hoses	connecting	the	two	vehicles	also	snapped.	The trailer	plunged	head-long	in	to	the	soft	soil	and	flipped	over	on	to	its balloon-roof,	shuddering	to	an	abrupt	halt.
The	rover	was	not	so	lucky.	It	continued	tumbling	down	the	hill, bouncing	the	traveler	around	like	clothes	in	a	dryer.	After	20	meters,	the soft	powder	gave	way	to	more	solid	sand	and	it	shuddered	to	a	halt.
The	rover	had	come	to	rest	on	its	side.	The	valves	leading	to	the	now missing	hoses	had	detected	the	sudden	pressure	drop	and	closed.	The pressure	seal	was	not	breached.
The	traveler	was	alive	for	now.



Chapter	24

The	department	heads	stared	at	the	satellite	image	on	the	projection screen.
"Jesus,"	Mitch	said.	"What	the	hell	happened?"
"The	rover's	on	its	side,"	Mindy	said,	pointing	to	the	screen.	"The trailer's	upside	down.	Those	rectangles	scattered	around	are	solar	cells."
Venkat	put	a	hand	on	his	chin.	"Do	we	have	any	information	on	the state	of	the	rover	pressure	vessel?"
"Nothing	obvious,"	Mindy	said.
"Any	signs	of	Watney	doing	something	after	the	accident?	An	EVA maybe?"
"No	EVA,"	Mindy	said.	"The	weather's	clear.	If	he'd	come	out	there'd be	visible	footsteps."
"Is	this	the	entire	crash	site?"	Bruce	Ng	asked.
"I	think	so,"	Mindy	said.	"Up	toward	the	top	of	the	photo,	which	is North,	there	are	ordinary	wheel	tracks.	Right	here,"	she	pointed	to	a	large disturbance	in	the	soil,	"is	where	I	think	things	went	wrong.	Judging	by where	that	ditch	is,	I'd	say	the	rover	rolled	and	slid	from	there.	You	can see	the	trench	it	left	behind.	The	trailer	flipped	forward	on	to	its	roof."
"I'm	not	saying	everything's	ok,"	Bruce	said,	"but	I	don't	think	it's	as bad	as	it	looks."
"Go	on,"	Venkat	said.
"The	rover's	designed	to	handle	a	roll,"	Bruce	explained.	"And	if there'd	been	pressure	loss	there'd	be	a	starburst	pattern	in	the	sand.	I	don't see	anything	like	that."
"Watney	may	still	be	hurt	inside,"	Mitch	said.	"He	could	have	banged his	head	or	broken	an	arm	or	something."
"Sure,"	Bruce	said.	"I'm	just	saying	the	rover	is	probably	ok."
"When	was	this	taken?"
Mindy	checked	her	watch.	"We	got	it	17	minutes	ago.	We’ll	get another	pic	in	9	minutes	when	MGS4’s	orbit	brings	it	in	view.”
“First	thing	he’ll	do	is	an	EVA	to	assess	damage,”	Venkat	said.
“Mindy,	keep	us	posted	on	any	changes.”
LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	498
Hmm.
Yeah.
Things	don't	go	well	on	the	descent	in	to	Schiaparelli	Basin.	To	give you	some	indication	of	how	unwell	they	went,	I'm	reaching	up	to	the computer	to	type	this.	Because	it's	still	mounted	near	the	control	panel, and	the	rover	is	on	its	side.
I	got	bounced	around	a	lot,	but	I'm	a	well-honed	machine	in	times	of crisis.	As	soon	as	the	rover	toppled,	I	curled	in	to	a	ball	and	cowered.
That's	the	kind	of	action	hero	I	am.
It	worked,	too.	Cause	I'm	not	hurt.
The	pressure	vessel	is	intact,	so	that's	a	plus.	The	valves	that	lead	to the	trailer	hoses	are	shut.	Probably	means	the	hoses	disconnected.	And that	means	the	trailer	junction	snapped.	Wonderful.
Looking	around	the	interior	here,	I	don't	think	anything	is	broken.	The water	tanks	stayed	sealed.	There	aren't	any	visible	leaks	in	the	air	tanks. The	bedroom	came	unfolded	and	it's	all	over	the	place,	but	it's	just	canvas so	it	can't	have	gotten	too	hurt.
The	driving	controls	are	ok,	and	the	Nav	Computer	is	telling	me	the rover	is	at	an	"unacceptably	dangerous	tilt."	Thanks,	Nav!
So	I	rolled.	That's	not	the	end	of	the	world.	I'm	alive	and	the	rover's fine.	I'm	more	worried	about	the	solar	cells	I	probably	rolled	over.	Also, since	the	trailer	detached	there's	a	good	chance	it's	....	up,	too.	The balloon	roof	it	has	isn't	exactly	durable.	If	it	popped,	the	shit	inside	will have	flung	out	in	all	directions	and	I'll	have	to	go	find	it.	That's	my critical	life	support.
Speaking	of	life	support,	the	rover	switched	over	to	the	local	tanks when	the	valves	shut.	Good	boy,	Rover!	Here's	a	Scooby-Snack.
I've	got	20L	of	oxygen	(enough	to	keep	me	breathing	for	40	days)	but without	the	Regulator	(which	is	in	the	trailer)	I'm	back	to	chemical	CO2 absorption.	I	have	312	hours	of	filters	left.	Plus	I	have	another	171	hours of	EVA	suit	CO2	filters	as	well.	All	told,	they'll	last	483	hours,	which	is close	to	20	sols.	So	I	have	time	to	get	things	working	again.
I'm	really	damn	close	to	the	MAV	now.	About	220km.	I'm	not	going to	let	something	like	this	stop	me	from	getting	there.	And	I	don't	need everything	to	work	at	top	form	anymore.	I	just	need	the	rover	to	work	for 220	more	kilometers	and	the	life	support	to	work	for	51	more	sols.	That's it.
Time	to	suit	up	and	look	for	the	trailer.
LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	498	(2)
I	had	an	EVA	and	things	aren't	too	bad.	Mind	you,	they're	not	good.
I	trashed	3	solar	cells.	They're	under	the	rover	and	cracked	all	to	hell. They	might	still	be	able	to	piss	out	out	a	few	watts,	but	I'm	not	holding out	much	hope.	I	did	come	in	to	this	with	one	extra	solar	cell.	I	needed	28 for	my	daily	operations	and	I	brought	29	(14	on	the	rover's	roof,	7on	the trailer's	roof,	and	8	on	the	makeshift	shelves	I	installed	on	the	sides	of both	vehicles.)
I	tried	pushing	the	rover	over,	but	I	wasn't	strong	enough.	I'll	need	to rig	something	to	get	a	leverage	advantage.	Other	than	being	on	its	side,	I don't	see	any	real	problems.
Well,	that's	not	true.	The	tow	hook	is	....	beyond	repair.	Half	of	it ripped	clean	off.	Fortunately,	the	trailer	also	has	a	tow	hook,	so	I	have	a spare.
The	trailer's	in	a	precarious	situation.	It's	upside-down	and	sitting	on the	inflated	roof.	I'm	not	sure	which	god	smiled	down	on	me	and	kept	that balloon	from	popping,	but	I'm	grateful.	My	first	priority	will	be	righting it.	The	longer	it	puts	weight	on	that	balloon,	the		larger	the	chances	it'll pop.
While	I	was	out,	I	collected	the	26	solar	cells	that	aren't	under	the rover	and	set	them	up	to	recharge	my	batteries.	May	as	well,	right?
So	right	now,	I	have	a	few	problems	to	tackle:	First,	I	need	to	right
the	trailer.	Or	at	least	get	the	weight	off	the	balloon.	Next,	I	need	to	right the	rover.	Finally,	I	need	to	replace	the	rover's	tow	hook	with	the	one	on the	trailer.
Also,	I	should	spell	out	a	message	for	NASA.	They're	probably worried.


Mindy	read	the	Morse	code	aloud.	“Rolled.	Fixing	now.” “What?	That's	it?”	Venkat	said	over	the	phone.
“That's	all	he	said,”	she	reported,	cradling	the	phone	as	she	typed	out an	email	to	the	list	of	interested	parties.
“Just	three	words?	Nothing	about	his	physical	health?	His	equipment?
His	supplies?”
“You	got	me,”	she	said.	“He	left	a	detailed	status	report.	I	just decided	to	lie	for	no	reason.”
“Funny,”	Venkat	said.	“Be	a	smart-ass	to	a	guy	seven	levels	above you	at	your	company.	See	how	that	works	out.”
“Oh	no,”	Mindy	said.	“I	might	lose	my	job	as	an	interplanetary voyeur?	I	guess	I'd	have	to	use	my	Master's	degree	for	something	else.”
“I	remember	when	you	were	shy.”
“I'm	space	paparazzi	now.	The	attitude	comes	with	the	job.”
“Yeah,	yeah,”	Venkat	said.	“Just	send	the	email.”
“Already	sent.”


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	499

I	had	a	busy	day	today	and	I	got	a	lot	done.
I	started	out	pretty	sore.	I	had	to	sleep	on	the	wall	of	the	rover.	The bedroom	won't	work	when	the	airlock	is	facing	up.	I	did	get	to	use	the bedroom,	somewhat.	I	folded	it	up	and	used	it	as	a	bed.
Anyway,	suffice	to	say	the	wall	of	the	rover	wasn't	made	for	sleeping on.	But	after	a	morning	potato	and	Vicodin,	I	was	feeling	much	better.
At	first	I	figured	my	top	priority	was	the	trailer.	Then	I	changed	my
mind.	After	taking	a	good	look	at	it,	I	decided	I'd	never	be	able	to	right	it by	myself.	I'd	need	the	rover.
So	today	was	focused	on	getting	the	rover	righted.
I	brought	all	my	tools	along	on	this	trip,	figuring	I'd	need	them	for	the MAV	modifications.	And	along	with	them	I	brought	cabling.	Once	I	get set	up	at	the	MAV,	my	solar	cells	and	batteries	will	be	in	a	fixed	position. I	don't	want	to	move	the	rover	around	every	time	I	use	a	drill	on	the	far side	of	the	MAV.	So	I	brought	all	the	electrical	cabling	I	could	fit.
Good	thing,	too.	Because	it	doubles	as	rope.
I	dug	up	my	longest	cable.	It's	the	same	one	I	used	to	power	the	drill that	destroyed	Pathfinder.	I	call	it	my	“Lucky	Cable.”
I	plugged	one	end	in	to	the	battery	and	the	other	in	to	the	infamous sample	drill.	Then	walked	off	with	the	drill	to	find	solid	ground.	Once	I found	it,	I	kept	going	until	I'd	gone	as	far	as	the	electrical	line	would reach.	I	drove	a	1-meter	bit	half	a	meter	into	a	rock,	unplugged	the	power line,	and	tied	it	around	the	base	of	the	bit.
Then	I	went	back	to	the	rover	and	tied	off	the	cord	to	the	roof-rack	bar on	the	high	side.	Now	I	had	a	long,	taut	line	running	perpendicular	to	the rover.
I	walked	to	the	middle	of	the	cord	and	pulled	it	laterally.	The	leverage advantage	on	the	rover	was	huge.	I	only	hoped	it	wouldn't	break	the	drill bit	before	it	tipped	the	rover.
I	backed	away,	pulling	the	line	more	and	more.	Something	had	to give,	and	it	wasn't	going	to	be	me.	I	had	Archimedes	on	my	side.	The rover	finally	tipped.
It	fell	on	to	its	wheels,	kicking	up	a	large	cloud	of	soft	dust.	It	was	a silent	affair.	I	was	far	enough	away	that	the	thin	atmosphere	had	no	hope of	carrying	the	sound	to	me.
I	untied	the	power	line,	liberated	the	drill	bit,	and	returned	to	the rover.	I	gave	it	a	full	system's	check.	That's	a	boring-as-hell	task	but	I	had to	do	it.	Every	system	and	subsystem	was	working	correctly.
JPL	did	a	damn	good	job	making	these	rovers.	If	I	get	back	to	Earth, I'm	buying	Bruce	Ng	a	beer.	Though	I	guess	I	should	buy	all	the	JPL	guys a	beer.
Beers	for	....	everyone	if	I	get	back	to	Earth.
Anyway,	with	the	rover	back	on	its	wheels	it	was	time	to	work	on	the trailer.	Problem	is,	I'm	in	a	crater.
I	had	gotten	most	of	the	way	down	the	Ramp	when	I	rolled	the	rover. And	the	Ramp	is	up	against	the	western	edge	of	the	crater.	So	the	sun	sets really	early	from	my	point	of	view.	I'm	in	the	shadow	of	the	western	wall. And	that	royally	sucks.
Mars	is	not	Earth.	It	doesn't	have	a	thick	atmosphere	to	bend	light	and carry	particles	that	reflect	light	around	corners.	It's	damn-near	a	vacuum here.	Once	the	sun	isn't	visible,	I'm	in	the	dark.	Phobos	gives	me	some moonlight,	but	not	enough	to	work	with.	Deimos	is	a	little	piece	of	shit that's	no	good	to	anyone.
Long	story	short:	I	ran	out	of	daylight.	I	hate	to	leave	the	trailer sitting	on	its	balloon	for	another	night,	but	there's	not	much	else	I	can	do. I	figure	it's	survived	a	whole	day	like	that.	It's	probably	stable	for	now.
And	hey,	with	the	rover	righted,	I	get	to	use	the	bedroom	again!	It's the	simple	things	in	life	that	matter.
LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	500
When	I	woke	up	this	morning,	the	trailer	hadn't	popped	yet.	So	that was	a	good	start.
The	trailer	was	a	bigger	challenge	than	the	rover.	I	only	had	to	tip	the rover.	I'd	need	to	completely	flip	the	trailer.	That	requires	lot	more	force than	yesterday's	little	leverage	trick.
The	first	step	was	to	drive	the	rover	to	near	the	trailer.	Then	came	the digging.
Oh	god	the	digging.
The	trailer	was	upside	down	with	its	nose	pointed	downhill.	I	decided the	best	way	to	right	it	was	to	take	advantage	of	the	slope	and	roll	the trailer	over	its	nose.	Basically	to	make	it	do	a	somersault	to	land	on	its wheels.
I	can	make	this	happen	by	tying	off	the	cable	to	the	rear	of	the	trailer
and	towing	with	the	rover.	But	if	I	tried	that	without	digging	a	hole	first, the	trailer	would	just	slide	along	the	ground.	I	needed	it	to	tip	up.	I needed	a	hole	for	the	nose	to	fall	in	to.
So	I	dug	a	hole.	A	hole	one	by	three	meters,	and	one	meter	deep.	It took	me	four	miserable	hours	of	hard	labor,	but	I	got	it	done.
I	hopped	in	the	rover	and	drove	it	downhill,	dragging	the	trailer	with me.	As	I'd	hoped,	the	trailer	nosed	in	to	the	hole	and	tipped	up.	From there,	it	fell	on	to	its	wheels	with	a	huge	plume	of	dust.
Then	I	sat	for	a	moment,	dumbstruck	that	my	plan	actually	worked.
And	now	I'm	out	of	daylight	again.	I	can't	wait	to	get	out	of	this ....
shadow.	All	I	need	is	one	day	of	driving	toward	the	MAV	and	I'll be	away	from	the	wall.	But	for	now,	it's	another	early	night.
I'll	spend	tonight	without	the	trailer	to	manage	my	life	support.	It	may be	righted,	but	I	have	no	idea	if	the	shit	inside	still	works.	The	rover	still has	ample	supplies	for	me.
I'll	spend	the	rest	of	the	evening	enjoying	a	potato.	And	by	“enjoying” I	mean	“hating	so	much	I	want	to	kill	people.”
LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	501
I	started	the	day	with	some	Nothin'	Tea.	Nothin'	Tea	is	easy	to	make. First,	get	some	hot	water,	then	add	nothin'.	I	experimented	with	Potato Skin	Tea	a	few	weeks	ago.	The	less	said	about	that	the	better.
I	ventured	in	to	the	trailer	today.	Not	an	easy	task.	It's	pretty	cramped in	there;	I	had	to	leave	my	EVA	suit	in	the	airlock.
The	first	thing	I	noticed	was	that	it	was	really	hot	in	there.	It	took	me a	few	minutes	to	work	out	why.
The	Atmospheric	Regulator	was	still	in	perfect	working	order,	but	it had	nothing	to	do.	Without	being	connected	to	the	rover,	it	no	longer	had my	CO2	production	to	deal	with.	The	atmosphere	in	the	trailer	was perfect,	why	change	anything?
With	no	regulation	necessary,	the	air	was	not	being	pumped	out	to	the
AREC	for	freeze-separation.	And	thus	it	wasn't	coming	back	in	as	a	liquid in	need	of	heating.
But	remember,	the	RTG	gives	off	heat	all	the	time.	You	can't	stop	it. So	the	heat	just	built	up.	Eventually,	things	reached	a	balance	point	where the	heat	bled	through	the	hull	as	fast	as	the	RTG	could	add	it.	If	you're curious,	that	balance	point	was	a	sweltering	41C.
I	did	a	full	diagnostic	on	the	Regulator	and	Oxygenator	and	I'm	happy to	report	both	are	working	perfectly.
The	RTG's	water	tank	was	empty,	which	is	no	surprise.	It	was	an	open top,	not	intended	to	be	turned	upside	down.	The	floor	of	the	trailer	has	a lot	of	puddled	water	that	took	me	quite	a	while	to	sop	up	with	my jumpsuit.	I	topped	the	tank	off	with	some	more	water	from	a	sealed container	that	I'd	stored	in	the	trailer	earlier.	Remember,	I	need	that	water to	have	something	for	the	returning	air	to	bubble	through.	That's	my heating	system.
But	all	things	considered,	it	was	good	news.	The	critical	components are	working	fine,	and	both	vehicles	are	back	on	their	tires.
The	hoses	that	connected	the	rover	and	trailer	were	designed	well,	and released	without	breaking.	I	simply	snapped	them	back	in	to	place	and	the vehicles	were	sharing	life	support	again.
The	one	remaining	thing	to	fix	was	the	tow	hook.	It	was	absolutely ruined.	It	took	the	full	force	of	the	crash.	As	I	suspected,	the	trailer's	tow hook	was	unscathed.	So	I	transferred	it	to	the	rover	and	reconnected	the two	vehicles	for	travel.
All	told,	that	little	fender-bender	cost	me	4	sols.	But	now	I'm	back	in action!
Sort	of.
What	if	I	run	in	to	another	powder	pit?	I	got	lucky	this	time.	Next time	I	might	not	get	off	so	easy.	I	think	this	was	sort	of	a	freak	accident. The	problem	was	that	one	wheel	was	on	solid	ground	while	the	other	was on	soft	powder.
I	need	a	way	to	know	if	the	ground	in	front	of	me	is	safe.	At	least	for the	duration	of	my	time	on	The	Ramp.	Once	I'm	in	the	Schiaparelli	Basin proper,	I	can	count	on	the	normal	sandy	terrain	I'm	used	to.
If	I	could	have	anything,	it	would	be	a	radio	to	ask	NASA	the	safe
path	down	the	Ramp.	Well,	if	I	could	have	anything,	it	would	be	for	the green-skinned	yet	beautiful	Queen	of	Mars	to	rescue	me	so	she	can	learn more	about	this	Earth	thing	called	“lovemaking”.
It's	been	a	long	time	since	I've	seen	a	woman.	Just	sayin'.
Anyway,	to	ensure	I	don't	crash	again,	I'll--	Seriously...	no	women	in like,	years.	I	don't	ask	for	much.	And	believe	me,	a	Botanist	/	Mechanical Engineer	doesn't	exactly	have	ladies	lined	up	at	the	door.	But	still,	c'mon.
Anyway.	I'll	drive	slower.	Like...	a	crawl.	That	should	give	me	enough time	to	react	if	one	wheel	starts	to	sink.	Also,	the	lower	speed	will	give me	more	torque,	making	it	less	likely	I	lose	traction.
Up	till	now	I've	been	driving	25kph,	so	I'm	going	to	cut	that	to	5kph. I'm	still	toward	the	top	of	the	Ramp,	but	the	whole	thing	is	only	40km.	I can	take	my	time	and	get	safely	to	the	bottom.	It	should	take	about	8 hours.
I'll	do	it	tomorrow.	I'm	already	out	of	daylight	again	today.	That's another	bonus:	Once	I	clear	the	ramp,	I	can	start	bee-lining	toward	the MAV,	which	will	take	me	away	from	the	crater	wall.	I'll	be	back	to enjoying	the	entire	day's	sunlight	instead	of	just	half	of	it.
If	I	get	back	to	Earth,	I'll	be	famous,	right?	A	fearless	astronaut	who beat	all	the	odds,	right?	I	bet	women	like	that.
More	motivation	to	stay	alive.


“So	it	looks	like	he's	fixed	everything,”	Mindy	explained.	“And	his message	today	was	'ALL	BETTER	NOW'	so	I	guess	he's	got	everything working.”
She	surveyed	the	smiling	faces	of	the	meeting	room.
“Awesome.”	Mitch	said.
“Great	news,”	Bruce's	voice	came	in	through	the	speakerphone.
Venkat	leaned	forward	to	the	speakerphone	“How	are	the	MAV modification	plans	coming,	Bruce?	Is	JPL	going	to	have	that	procedure soon?”
“We're	working	around	the	clock	on	it,”	Bruce	said.	“We're	past	most of	the	big	hurdles.	Working	out	the	details	now.”
“Good,	good,”	Venkat	said.	“Any	surprises	I	should	know	about?”
“Um...”	Bruce	said.	“Yeah,	a	few.	This	might	not	be	the	best	venue for	it.	I'll	be	back	in	Houston	with	the	procedure	in	a	day	or	two.	We	can go	through	it	then.”
“Ominous,”	Venkat	said.	“But	ok.	We'll	pick	it	up	later.”
“Can	I	spread	the	word?”	Annie	asked.	“It'd	be	nice	to	see	something other	than	the	rover	crash	site	on	the	news	tonight.”
“Definitely,”	Venkat	said.	“It'll	be	nice	to	have	some	good	news	for	a change.	Mindy,	how	long	until	he	gets	to	the	MAV?”
“At	his	usual	rate	of	90km	per	sol,”	Mindy	said,	“he	should	get	there on	Sol	504.	Sol	505	if	he	takes	his	time.	He	always	drives	in	the	early morning,	finishing	around	noon.”	She	checked	an	application	on	her laptop.	“Noon	on	Sol	504	will	be	11:41am	this	Wednesday	here	in
Houston.	Noon	on	Sol	505	will	be	12:21pm	on	Thursday.”
“Mitch,	who's	handling	Ares	4	MAV	communication?”
“The	Ares	3	mission	control	team,”	Mitch	replied.	“It'll	be	in	control room	2”.
“I	assume	you'll	be	there?”
“Bet	your	ass	I'll	be	there.”
“So	will	I.”


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	502

Every	Thanksgiving,	my	family	used	to	drive	from	Chicago	to Sandusky,	an	8-hour	drive.	It's	where	Mom's	sister	lived.	Dad	would always	drive,	and	he	was	the	slowest,	most	cautious	driver	who	ever	took the	wheel.
Seriously.	He	drove	like	he	was	taking	a	driver's	test.	Never	exceeded the	speed	limit,	always	had	his	hands	at	10	and	2,	adjusted	mirrors	before each	outing,	you	name	it.
It	was	infuriating.	We'd	be	on	the	freeway,	cars	blowing	by	left	and right.	Some	of	them	would	blare	their	horns	because,	honestly,	driving the	speed	limit	makes	you	a	road	hazard.	I	wanted	to	get	out	and	push.
I	felt	that	way	all	damn	day	today.	5km/h	is	literally	a	walking	pace.
And	I	drove	that	speed	for	eight	hours.
But	the	slow	speed	ensured	that	I	wouldn't	fall	in	to	anymore	powder pits	along	the	way.	And	of	course	I	didn't	encounter	any.	I	could	have driven	full	speed	and	had	no	problems.	But	better	safe	than	sorry.
The	good	news	is	I'm	off	the	Ramp.	I	camped	out	as	soon	as	the terrain	flattened	out.	I've	already	overdone	my	driving	time	for	the	day.	I could	go	further,	I	still	have	15%	battery	power	or	so,	but	I	want	to	get	as much	daylight	on	my	solar	cells	as	I	can.
I'm	in	the	Schiaparelli	Basin	at	last!	Far	from	the	crater	wall,	too.	I get	a	full	day	of	sunlight	every	day	from	now	on.
I	decided	it	was	time	for	a	very	special	occasion.	I	ate	the	meal	pack labeled	“Survived	Something	That	Should	Have	Killed	Me.”	Oh	my	god, I	forgot	how	good	real	food	tastes.
With	luck,	I'll	get	to	eat	“Arrival”	in	a	few	sols.


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	503

I	didn't	get	as	much	recharge	I	usually	would	yesterday.	Because	of my	extended	driving	time,	I	only	recharged	to	70%	before	night	fell.	So today's	driving	was	abbreviated.
	I	got	63km	before	I	had	to	camp	out	again.	But	I	don't	even	mind. Because	I'm	only	148km	from	the	MAV.	That	means	I'll	get	there	the	sol after	tomorrow.
Holy	hell,	I'm	really	going	to	make	it!


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	504

Holy	shit	this	is	awesome!	Holy	shit!	Holy	shit!
Ok	calm.	Calm.
I	made	90km	today.	By	my	estimate,	I'm	50km	from	the	MAV.	I should	get	there	some	time	tomorrow.	I'm	excited	about	that,	but	here's what	I'm	really	stoked	about:	I	caught	a	blip	from	the	MAV!
NASA	has	the	MAV	broadcasting	the	Ares	3	Hab	homing	signal.	Why wouldn't	they?	It	makes	perfect	sense.	Unlike	my	worn	out	shit,		the MAV	is	a	sleek,	perfectly	functional	machine,	ready	to	do	what	it's	told. And	they	have	it	pretending	to	be	the	Ares	3	Hab	so	my	rover	will	see	the signal	and	tell	me	where	it	is.
That	is	an	exceptionally	good	idea!	I	won't	have	to	wander	around looking	for	the	thing.	I'm	going	straight	to	it.
I	only	caught	a	blip.	I'll	get	more	as	I	get	closer.	It	has	three redundant	methods	of	communicating	with	Earth,	but	they're	extremely directed	and	are	designed	for	line-of-sight	communication.	It's	strange	to think	that	a	sand	dune	will	stop	me	from	hearing	what	the	MAV	has	to say,	but	it	can	talk	to	Earth	no	problem.	Well,	there	aren't	any	sand	dunes between	it	and	Earth	when	they	talk.
Somehow	they	messed	with	things	to	make	a	radial	signal,	however weak	it	may	be.	And	I	heard	it!
My	message	for	the	day	was	“GOT	BEACON	SIGNAL.”	If	I'd	had enough	rocks,	I	would	have	added	“AWESOME	....	IDEA!!!”	But it's	a	really	sandy	area.
The	MAV	waited	in	southwestern	Schiaparelli.	It	stood	an	impressive 27	meters	tall,	its	conical	body	gleaming	in	the	midday	sun.
The	rover	crested	a	nearby	dune	with	the	trailer	in	tow.	It	slowed	for	a few	moments,	then	continued	toward	the	ship	at	top	speed.	It	came	to	a stop	20	meters	away.
There	it	remained	for	ten	minutes	while	the	astronaut	inside	suited	up.
He	stumbled	excitedly	out	of	the	airlock,	falling	to	the	ground	then scrambling	to	his	feet.	Beholding	the	MAV,	he	gestured	to	it	with	both arms,	as	if	in	disbelief.
He	leaped	in	to	the	air	several	times,	arms	held	high	with	fists clenched.	Then	he	knelt	on	one	knee	and	fist-pumped	repeatedly.
Running	to	the	spacecraft,	he	hugged	Landing	Strut	B.	After	a	few moments,	he	broke	off	the	embrace	to	perform	another	round	of	leaping celebrations.
Now	fatigued,	the	astronaut	stood	with	arms	akimbo,	looking	up	at the	sleek	lines	of	the	engineering	marvel	before	him.
Climbing	the	ladder	on	the	landing	stage,	he	reached	the	ascent	stage and	entered	the	airlock.	He	sealed	the	door	behind	him.

	 
Chapter	25

LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	505

I	finally	made	it!	I'm	at	the	MAV!
Well,	right	this	second,	I'm	back	in	the	rover.	I	did	go	in	to	the	MAV to	do	a	systems	check	and	boot-up.	I	had	to	keep	my	EVA	suit	on	the whole	time	because	there's	no	life	support	in	there	just	yet.
It's	going	through	a	self	check	right	now,	and	I'm	feeding	it	oxygen and	nitrogen	with	hoses	from	the	rover.	This	is	all	part	of	the	MAV's design.	It	doesn't	bring	air	along.	Why	would	it?	That's	a	needless	weight when	you'll	have	a	Hab	full	of	air	right	next	door.
I'm	guessing	folks	at	NASA	are	popping	champagne	right	now	and sending	me	lots	of	messages.	I'll	read	them	in	a	bit.	First	things	first:	Get the	MAV	some	life	support.	Then	I'll	be	able	to	work	comfortably	inside.
And	then	I'll	have	a	boring	conversation	with	NASA.	The	content	may be	interesting,	but	the	14-minute	transmission	time	between	here	and Earth	will	be	a	bit	dull.


[13:07]HOUSTON:	Congratulations	from	all	of	us here	at	Mission	Control!	Well	done!	What's	your status?
[13:21]MAV:	Thanks!	No	health	or	physical problems.	The	rover	and	trailer	are	getting	pretty worn	out,	but	still	functional.	Oxygenator	and Regulator	both	working	fine.	I	didn't	bring	the
Water	Reclaimer.	Just	brought	the	water.	Plenty	of potatoes	left.	I'm	good	to	last	till	549.
[13:36]HOUSTON:	Glad	to	hear	it.	Hermes	is still	on	track	for	a	Sol	549	flyby.	As	you	know, the	MAV	will	need	to	lose	some	weight	to	make	the intercept.	We're	going	to	get	you	those	procedures within	the	day.	How	much	water	do	you	have?	What did	you	do	with	urine?
[13:50]MAV:	I	have	550L	of	remaining	water.
I've	been	dumping	urine	outside	along	the	way.
[14:05]HOUSTON:	Preserve	all	water.	Don't	do any	more	urine	dumps.	Store	it	somewhere.	Turn	the rover's	radio	on	and	leave	it	on.	We	can	contact it	through	MAV.


“So	is	it	ready?”	Venkat	asked.
“Yes,	it's	ready.”	Bruce	said.	“But	you're	not	going	to	like	it.”
“Go	on.”
“Bear	in	mind,”	Bruce	said,	producing	a	booklet	from	his	briefcase, “This	is	the	end	result	of	thousands	of	hours	of	work,	testing,	and	lateral thinking	by	all	the	best	guys	at	JPL.”
“I'm	sure	it	was	hard	to	trim	down	a	ship	that's	already	designed	to	be as	light	as	possible,”	Venkat	said.
Bruce	slid	the	booklet	across	the	desk	to	Venkat.	“The	problem	is	the intercept	velocity.	The	MAV	is	designed	to	get	to	Low	Mars	Orbit,	which is	4.1kps.	But	the	Hermes	flyby	will	be	5.8kps.”
Venkat	flipped	through	the	pages.	“Care	to	summarize?”
“Firstly,	we're	going	to	add	fuel.	The	MAV	makes	its	own	fuel	from the	Martian	atmosphere,	but	it's	limited	by	how	much	Hydrogen	it	has.	It brought	enough	to	make	19,397kg	of	fuel,	as	it	was	designed	to	do.	If	we can	give	it	more	hydrogen,	it	can	make	more.” “How	much	more?”
“For	every	kilogram	of	hydrogen,	it	can	make	13	kilograms	of	fuel. Watney	has	550	liters	of	water.	We'll	have	him	electrolyze	it	to	get	60kg of	Hydrogen.”	Bruce	reached	over	the	desk	and	flipped	a	few	pages, pointing	to	a	diagram.	“The	fuel	plant	can	make	780kg	of	fuel	from	that.”
“If	he	electrolyzes	his	water	what'll	he	drink?”
“He	can	electrolyze	urine,	so	we	only	need	to	set	a	few	liters	aside	for
the	last	couple	of	days.”
“I	see.	And	what	does	780kg	of	fuel	buy	us?”	Venkat	asked.
“It	buys	us	300kg	of	payload.	It's	all	about	fuel	versus	payload.	The MAV's	launch	weight	is	over	12,600kg.	We	need	to	get	that	down	to 7,300kg.	That's	accounting	for	the	bonus	fuel.	So	the	rest	of	this	booklet
is	how	to	remove	over	five	thousand	kilograms	from	the	ship.”
Venkat	leaned	back.	“Walk	me	through	it.”
Bruce	pulled	another	copy	of	the	booklet	from	his	briefcase.	“There were	some	gimmies	right	off	the	bat.	The	design	presumes	500kg	of Martian	soil	and	rock	samples.	Obviously	we	won't	do	that.	Also,	there's just	one	passenger	instead	of	six.	That	saves	500kg	when	you	consider their	weight	plus	their	suits	and	gear.	And	we	can	lose	the	other	5 acceleration	chairs.	And	of	course,	we'll	remove	all	nonessential	gear. The	med	kit,	tool	kit,	internal	harnessing,	straps,	and	anything	else	that isn't	nailed	down.	And	some	stuff	that	is.
“Next	up,”	he	continued,	“We're	ditching	all	life	support.	The	tanks, pumps,	heaters,	air	lines,	CO2	absorption	system,	even	the	insulation	on the	inner	side	of	the	hull.	We	don't	need	it.	We'll	have	Watney	wear	his
EVA	suit	for	the	whole	trip.”
“Won't	that	make	it	awkward	for	him	to	use	the	controls?”	Venkat asked.
“He	won't	use	any	controls,”	Bruce	said.	“Major	Martinez	will	pilot the	MAV	remotely	from	Hermes.	It's	already	designed	for	remote
piloting.	It	was	remotely	landed,	after	all.”
“What	if	something	goes	wrong?”	Venkat	asked.
“Martinez	is	the	best	trained	pilot,”	Bruce	said.	“If	there	is	an emergency,	he's	the	guy	you	want	controlling	the	ship.”
“Hmm,”	Venkat	said	cautiously.	“We've	never	had	a	manned	ship controlled	remotely	before.	But	ok.	Go	on.”
“Since	Watney	won't	be	flying	the	ship,”	Bruce	continued,	“he	won't need	any	of	those	controls.	We'll	ditch	the	control	panels	and	all	the power	and	data	lines	that	lead	to	them.”
“Wow,”	Venkat	said.	“We're	really	gutting	this	thing.”
“I'm	just	getting	started,”	Bruce	said.	“The	power	needs	will	be dramatically	reduced	now	that	life	support	is	gone,	so	we'll	dump	three	of the	five	batteries	and	the	auxiliary	power	system.	The	Orbital
Maneuvering	System	has	3	redundant	thrusters.	We'll	get	rid	of	those.
Also,	the	secondary	and	tertiary	comm	systems	can	go.”
“Wait,	what?”	Venkat	said,	shocked.	“You're	going	to	have	a	remote controlled	ascent	with	no	backup	comm	systems?”
“No	point,”	Bruce	said.	“If	the	comm	system	goes	out	during	ascent, the	time	it	takes	to	reacquire	will	be	too	long	to	do	any	good.	The backups	don't	help	us.”
“This	is	getting	really	risky,	Bruce.”
Bruce	sighed.	“I	know,	Venkat.	There's	just	no	other	way.	And	I'm	not even	to	the	nasty	stuff	yet.”
Venkat	rubbed	his	forehead.	“By	all	means,	tell	me	the	nasty	stuff.”
“We'll	remove	the	nose	airlock,	the	windows,	and	Hull	Panel	19.”
Venkat	blinked.	“You're	taking	the	front	of	the	ship	off?”
“Sure,”	Bruce	said.	“The	nose	airlock	alone	is	400kg.	The	windows are	pretty	damn	heavy,	too.	And	they're	connected	by	Hull	Panel	19	so may	as	well	take	that,	too.”
“So	he's	going	to	launch	with	a	big	hole	in	the	front	of	the	ship?”
“We'll	have	him	cover	it	with	Hab	canvas.”
“Hab	canvas?	For	a	launch	to	orbit!?”
Bruce	shrugged.	“The	hull's	mostly	there	to	keep	the	air	in.	Mars's atmosphere	is	so	thin	you	don't	need	a	lot	of	streamlining.	By	the	time	the ship's	going	fast	enough	for	air	resistance	to	matter,	it'll	be	high	enough that	there's	practically	no	air.	We've	run	all	the	simulations.	Should	be good.”
“You're	sending	him	to	space	under	a	tarp.”
“Pretty	much,	yeah.”
“Like	a	hastily	loaded	pick	up	truck.”
“Yeah.	Can	I	go	on?”
“Sure,	can't	wait.”
“We'll	also	have	him	remove	the	back	panel	of	the	pressure	vessel. It's	the	only	other	panel	he	can	remove	with	the	tools	on-hand.	Also, we're	getting	rid	of	the	auxiliary	fuel	pump.	Sad	to	see	it	go,	but	it	weighs too	much	for	its	usefulness.	And	we're	nixing	a	Stage	One	engine.”
“An	engine?”
“Yeah.	The	Stage	One	booster	works	fine	if	one	engine	goes	out.	It'll save	us	a	huge	amount	of	weight.	Only	during	the	Stage	One	ascent,	but still.	Pretty	good	fuel	savings.” Bruce	fell	silent.
“That	it?”	Venkat	asked.
“Yeah.”
Venkat	sighed.	“You've	removed	most	of	the	safety	backups.	What's this	do	to	the	estimated	odds	of	failure?”
“It's	about	4%.”
“Jesus	Christ.”	Venkat	said.	“Normally	we'd	never	even	consider something	that	risky.”
“It's	all	we've	got,	Venk,”	Bruce	said.	“We've	tested	it	all	out	and	run simulations	galore.	We	should	be	ok	if	everything	works	the	way	its supposed	to.”
“Yeah.	Great.”	Venkat	said.
[08:41]MAV:	You	....	kidding	me?
[09:55]HOUSTON:	Admittedly,	they	are	very invasive	modifications,	but	they	have	to	be	done. The	procedure	doc	we	sent	has	instructions	for each	of	these	steps	with	tools	you	have	on	hand. Also,	you'll	need	to	start	electrolyzing	water	to get	the	hydrogen	for	the	fuel	plant.	We'll	send you	procedures	for	that	shortly.
[09:09]MAV:	You're	sending	me	into	space	in	a convertible.
[09:24]HOUSTON:	There	will	be	Hab	canvas covering	the	holes.	It	will	provide	enough aerodynamics	in	Mars's	atmosphere.
[09:38]MAV:	So	it's	a	ragtop.	Much	better.

LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	506

On	the	way	here,	in	my	copious	free	time,	I	designed	a	“workshop.”	I figured	I'd	need	space	to	work	on	stuff	without	having	to	wear	an	EVA suit.	I	devised	a	brilliant	plan	whereby	the	current	bedroom	would 	become	the	new	home	of	the	Regulator	and	Oxygenator,	and	the	nowempty	trailer	would	become	my	workshop.
It's	a	stupid	idea	and	I'm	not	doing	it.
All	I	need	is	a	pressurized	area	that	I	can	work	in.	I	somehow convinced	myself	that	the	bedroom	wasn't	an	option	because	it's	a	hassle to	get	stuff	into	it.	But	it	won't	be	that	bad.
It	attaches	to	the	rover	airlock,	so	the	only	way	to	get	stuff	in	is annoying.	Bring	the	stuff	into	the	rover,	attach	the	bedroom	to	the	airlock from	the	inside,	inflate	it,	bring	the	stuff	in	to	the	bedroom.	I'll	also	have to	empty	the	bedroom	of	all	tools	and	equipment	to	fold	it	up	any	time	I need	to	do	an	EVA.
So	yeah,	it'll	be	annoying,	but	all	it	costs	me	is	time.	And	I'm	actually doing	well	on	that	front.	I	have	43	more	sols	before	Hermes	flies	by.	And looking	at	the	procedure	NASA	has	in	mind	for	the	modifications,	I	can take	advantage	of	the	MAV	itself	as	a	workspace.
The	lunatics	at	NASA	have	me	doing	all	kinds	of	rape	to	the	MAV, but	I	don't	have	to	open	the	hull	till	the	end.	So	the	first	thing	I'll	do	is clear	out	a	bunch	of	clutter,	like	chairs	and	control	panels	and	the	like.
Once	they're	out,	I'll	have	a	lot	of	room	in	there	to	work.
But	I	didn't	do	anything	to	the	soon-to-be-mutilated	MAV	today.
Today	was	all	about	system	checks.	Now	that	I'm	back	in	contact	with NASA,	I	have	to	go	back	to	being	all	“safety	first.”	Strangely,	NASA doesn't	have	total	faith	in	my	kludged-together	rover	or	my	method	of piling	everything	into	the	trailer.	They	had	me	do	a	full	systems	check	on every	single	component.
Everything's	still	working	fine,	though	it's	wearing	down.	The Regulator	and	Oxygenator	are	less	than	peak	efficiency	(to	say	the	least) and	the	trailer	leaks	some	air	every	day.	Not	enough	to	cause	problems, but	it's	not	a	perfect	seal.	NASA's	pretty	uncomfortable	with	it,	but	we don't	have	any	other	options.
Then,	they	had	me	run	a	full	diagnostic	on	the	MAV.	That's	in	much better	shape.	Everything's	sleek	and	pristine	and	perfectly	functional.	I'd almost	forgotten	what	new	hardware	even	looks	like. Pity	I'm	going	to	tear	it	apart.


“You	killed	Watney,”	Lewis	said.
“Yeah,”	Martinez	said,	scowling	at	his	monitor.	The	words	“Collision with	Terrain”	blinked	accusingly.
“I	pulled	a	nasty	trick	on	him,”	Johanssen	said.	“I	gave	him	a malfunctioning	altitude	readout	and	made	engine	3	cut	out	too	early.	It's	a deadly	combination.”
“Shouldn't	have	been	a	mission	failure,”	Martinez	said.	“I	should have	noticed	the	readout	was	wrong.	It	was	way	off.”
“Don't	sweat	it,”	Lewis	said.	“That's	why	we	drill.	You've	still	got three	weeks	to	get	it	right.”
“Will	do,”	Martinez	said.
“We	only	got	a	week	of	remote	launch	training,”	Johanssen	said.	“It was	only	supposed	to	happen	if	we	scrubbed	before	landing.	We'd	launch the	MAV	to	have	it	act	as	a	satellite.	It	was	a	cut-your-losses	scenario.” “It's	mission-critical	now,”	Lewis	said.	“So	get	it	right.” “Aye,	Commander.”	Martinez	said.
“Resetting	the	Sim,”	Johanssen	said.	“Anything	specific	you	want	to try?”
“Surprise	me,”	Martinez	said.
Leaving	the	control	room,	Lewis	made	her	way	to	the	reactor. Climbing	“up”	the	ladder	toward	the	center	of	the	ship,	the	centripetal force	on	her	diminished	to	nearly	zero	as	she	reached	the	core.	Vogel
looked	up	from	a	computer	console.	“Commander?”
“How	are	the	engines?”	She	asked,	grabbing	a	wall-mounted	handle	to stay	attached	to	the	slowly	turning	room.
“All	working	within	tolerance,”	Vogel	said.	“I	am	now	doing	a
diagnostic	on	the	reactor.	I	am	thinking	that	Johanssen	is	busy	with	the launching	training.	So	perhaps	I	do	this	diagnostic	for	her.”
“Good	idea,”	Lewis	said.	“And	how's	our	course?”
“All	is	well,”	Vogel	said.	“No	adjustments	necessary.	We	are	still	on track	to	planned	trajectory	within	4	meters.”
“Keep	me	posted	if	anything	changes.”
“Ja,	Commander.”
Floating	to	the	other	side	of	the	core,	Lewis	took	the	other	ladder	out, again	gaining	gravity	as	she	went	“down”.	She	made	her	way	to	the Airlock	2	ready	room.
Beck	held	a	coil	of	metal	wire	in	one	hand	and	a	pair	of	work	gloves in	the	other.	“Heya,	Commander.	What's	up?”
“I'd	like	to	know	your	plan	for	recovering	Mark.”
“Easy	enough	if	the	intercept	is	good,”	Beck	said.	“I	just	finished attaching	all	the	tethers	we	have	into	one	long	line.	It's	214	meters	long. I'll	have	the	MMU	pack	on,	so	moving	around	will	be	easy.	I	can	get going	up	to	around	10	meters	per	second	safely.	Any	more	and	I	risk breaking	the	tether	if	I	can't	stop	in	time.”
“How	fast	a	relative	velocity	can	you	handle,	you	think?”
“You	mean	once	I	get	to	Mark?	I	can	grab	the	MAV	easily	at	5	meters per	second.	10	meters	per	second	is	kind	of	like	jumping	on	to	a	moving train.	Anything	more	than	that	and	I	might	miss.”
“So,	including	the	MMU	safe	speed,	we	need	to	get	within	20	meters per	second	of	his	velocity.”
“And	the	intercept	has	to	be	within	214	meters,”	Beck	said.	“Pretty narrow	margin	of	error.”
“We've	got	a	lot	of	leeway,”	Lewis	said.	“The	launch	will	be	52 minutes	before	the	intercept	and	it	takes	12	minutes.	As	soon	as	Mark's S2	engine	cuts	out	we'll	know	our	intercept	point	and	velocity.	If	we	don't like	it,	we'll	have	40	minutes	to	correct.	Our	engine's	2	millimeters	per second	may	not	seem	like	much,	but	in	40	minutes	it	can	move	us	up	to
5.7	kilometers.”
“Good,”	Beck	said.	“And	214	meters	isn't	a	hard	limit,	per	se.” “Yes	it	is,”	Lewis	corrected.
“Nah,”	Beck	said.	“I	know	I'm	not	supposed	to	go	untethered,	but without	my	leash	I	could	get	way	out	there-” “Not	an	option.”	Lewis	said.
“But	we	could	double	or	even	triple	our	safe	intercept	range-” “We're	done	talking	about	this.”	Lewis	said	sternly.
“Aye,	Commander.”


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	526

There	aren't	many	people	who	can	say	they've	vandalized	a	three billion	dollar	spacecraft.	But	I'm	one	of	them.
I've	been	pulling	critical	hardware	out	of	the	MAV	left	and	right.	It's nice	to	know	that	my	launch	to	orbit	won't	have	any	pesky	back-up systems	weighing	me	down.
First	thing	I	did	was	remove	the	small	stuff.	Then	came	the	things	I could	disassemble.	Like	the	crew	seats,	several	of	the	back-up	systems, and	the	control	panels.
I'm	not	improvising	anything.	I'm	following	a	script	sent	by	NASA, which	was	set	up	to	make	things	as	easy	as	possible.	Sometimes	I	miss the	days	when	I	made	all	the	decisions	myself.	Then	I	shake	it	off	and remember	I'm	infinitely	better	with	a	bunch	of	geniuses	deciding	what	I do	than	making	shit	up	as	I	go	along.
Periodically,	I	suit	up,	crawl	into	the	airlock	with	as	much	junk	as	I can	fit,	and	dump	it	outside.	The	area	around	the	MAV	looks	like	the	set of	Sanford	and	Son.
I	learned	about	Sanford	and	Son	from	Lewis's	collection.	Seriously, that	woman	needs	to	see	someone	about	her	70's	problem.


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	529

I'm	turning	my	pee	in	to	rocket	fuel.	It's	easier	than	you'd	think.
Urine	is	mostly	water.	Separating	hydrogen	and	oxygen	only	requires
a	couple	of	electrodes	and	some	current.	The	problem	is	collecting	the hydrogen.	I	don't	have	any	equipment	for	pulling	hydrogen	out	of	the	air. The	Atmospheric	Regulator	doesn't	even	know	how.	The	last	time	I	had to	get	hydrogen	out	of	the	air	(back	when	I	turned	the	Hab	in	to	a	bomb)	I burned	it	to	turn	it	in	to	water.	Obviously	that	would	be	counterproductive.
But	NASA	thought	everything	through	and	gave	me	a	process.	First,	I disconnected	the	rover	and	trailer	from	each	other.	Then,	while	wearing my	EVA	suit,	I	depressurized	the	trailer	and	back-filled	it	with	pure oxygen	at	one	fourth	of	an	atmosphere.	Then	I	opened	a	plastic	box	full of	urine	and	put	a	couple	of	electrodes	in.	That's	why	I	needed	the atmosphere.	Without	it,	the	urine	would	just	boil	immediately	and	I'd	be hanging	around	in	an	piss-based	atmosphere.
The	electrolysis	separated	the	hydrogen	and	oxygen	from	each	other. Over	time,	it	reduced	the	urine	to	a	really	gross	sludge	as	it	pulled	the water	out.	Now	the	trailer	was	full	of	even	more	oxygen	and	also hydrogen.	Pretty	dangerous,	actually.
Then	I	fired	up	the	Atmospheric	Regulator.	It	doesn't	even	recognize hydrogen,	but	it	knows	how	to	yank	oxygen	out	of	the	air.	I	broke	all	the safeties	and	set	it	to	pull	100%	of	the	oxygen	out.	After	it	was	done,	all that	was	left	was	hydrogen.	That's	why	I	started	out	with	an	atmosphere of	pure	oxygen.	So	the	regulator	could	separate	it	later.
Then	I	opened	the	inner	airlock	door	and	had	it	evacuate	the	trailer.	It pumped	all	the	air	in	to	the	airlock's	holding	tank.	And	there	you	have	it, a	tank	of	pure	hydrogen.
The	final	step	was	to	take	the	airlock's	holding	tank	to	the	MAV	and transfer	the	contents	to	the	MAV's	hydrogen	tanks.	I've	said	this	many times	before	but:	Hurray	for	standardized	valve	systems!
Once	I	fed	it	the	hydrogen,	I	fired	up	the	fuel	plant	and	it	got	to	work making	the	additional	fuel	I'd	need.
I'll	need	to	go	through	this	process	several	more	times	as	the	launch date	approaches.	I	could	have	done	this	all	at	once,	but	NASA	doesn't want	me	to	run	low	on	water	until	we're	close	to	launch.	They'd	rather	I electrolyze	urine	over	time	because	I've	already	“used”	that	water.
If	I	survive	this,	I'll	tell	people	I	pissed	my	way	in	to	orbit.

[19:22]JOHANSSEN:	Hello,	Mark.
[19:23]MAV:	Johanssen!?	Holy	crap!	They	finally letting	you	talk	to	me	directly?
[19:24]JOHANSSEN:	Yes,	NASA	gave	the	OK	for direct	communication	an	hour	ago.	We're	only	35 light-seconds	apart,	so	we	can	talk	in	nearrealtime.	I	just	set	up	the	system	and	I'm	testing it	out.
[19:24]MAV:	What	took	them	so	long	to	let	us talk?
[19:25]JOHANSSEN:	The	psych	team	was	worried about	personality	conflicts.
[19:25]MAV:	What?	Just	cause	you	guys	abandoned me	on	a	godforsaken	planet	with	no	chance	of survival?
[19:26]JOHANSSEN:	Funny.	Don't	make	that	kind of	joke	with	Lewis.
[19:27]MAV:	Roger.	So	uh...	thanks	for	coming back	to	get	me.
[19:27]JOHANSSEN:	It's	the	least	we	could	do.
How	is	the	MAV	retrofit	going?
[19:28]MAV:	So	far,	so	good.	NASA	put	a	lot	of thought	into	the	procedures.	They	work.	That's	not to	say	they're	easy.	I	spent	the	last	3	days removing	Hull	Panel	19	and	the	front	window.	Even in	Mars-G	they're	heavy	motherfuckers.
[19:29]JOHANSSEN:	When	we	pick	you	up,	I	will make	wild,	passionate	love	to	you.	Prepare	your body.
[19:29]JOHANSSEN:	I	didn't	type	that!	That	was
Martinez!	I	stepped	away	from	the	console	for	like 10	seconds!
[19:29]MAV:	I've	really	missed	you	guys.
LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	543
I'm...	done?
I	think	I'm	done.
I	did	everything	on	the	list.	The	MAV	is	ready	to	fly.	And	in	6	sols, that's	just	what	it'll	do.	I	hope.
It	might	not	launch	at	all.	I	did	remove	an	engine,	after	all.	I	could have	....	up	all	sorts	of	things	during	that	process.	And	there's	no	way to	test	the	ascent	stage.	Once	you	light	it,	it's	lit.
Everything	else,	however,	will	go	through	tests	from	now	until launch.	Some	done	by	me,	some	done	remotely	by	NASA.	They're	not telling	me	the	failure	odds,	but	I'm	guessing	they're	the	highest	in	history.
Yuri	Gagarin	had	a	much	more	reliable	and	safe	ship	than	I	do. And	Soviet	ships	were	....	deathtraps.
“All	right,”	Lewis	said,	“tomorrow's	the	big	day.”
The	crew	floated	in	the	Rec.	They	had	halted	the	rotation	of	the	ship in	preparation	for	the	upcoming	operation.
“I'm	ready,”	Martinez	said.	“Johanssen	threw	everything	she	could	at me.	I	got	all	scenarios	to	orbit.”
“Everything	other	than	catastrophic	failures,”	Johanssen	corrected.
“Well	yeah,”	Martinez	said.	“Kind	of	pointless	to	simulate	an	ascent explosion.	Nothing	we	can	do.”
“Vogel,”	Lewis	said,	“How's	our	course.”
“It	is	perfect,”	Vogel	said.	“We	are	within	one	meter	of	projected	path and	two	centimeters	per	second	of	projected	velocity.”
“Good,”	she	said.	“Beck,	how	about	you?”
“Everything's	all	set	up,	Commander,”	Beck	said.	“I	linked	all	the tethers	I	could	find	and	spooled	them	up	in	Airlock	2.	My	suit	and	MMU are	prepped	and	ready.”
“Ok,”	Lewis	said.	“The	battle	plan	is	pretty	obvious.	Martinez	will	fly the	MAV,	Johanssen	will	sysop	the	ascent.	Beck	and	Vogel,	I	want	you	in Airlock	2	with	the	outer	door	open	before	the	MAV	even	launches.	You'll have	to	wait	52	minutes,	but	I	don't	want	to	risk	any	technical	glitches with	the	airlock	or	your	suits.	Once	we	reach	intercept,	it'll	be	Beck's	job to	get	Watney.”
“He	might	be	in	bad	shape	when	I	get	him,”	Beck	said.	“The	strippeddown	MAV	will	get	up	to	12	g's	during	the	launch.	He	could	be unconscious	and	may	even	have	internal	bleeding.”
“Just	as	well	you're	our	doctor,”	Lewis	said.	“Vogel,	if	all	goes according	to	plan,	you're	pulling	Beck	and	Watney	back	aboard	with	the tether.	If	things	go	wrong,	you're	Beck's	backup.” “Ja,”	Vogel	said.
“I	wish	there	was	more	we	could	do	right	now,”	Lewis	said.	“But	all we	have	left	is	the	wait.	Your	work	schedules	are	cleared.	All	scientific experiments	are	suspended.	Sleep	if	you	can,	run	diagnostics	on	your equipment	if	you	can't.”
“We'll	get	him,	Commander,”	Martinez	said.	“24	hours	from	now,
Mark	Watney	will	be	right	here	in	this	room.”
“Let's	hope	so,	Major.”	Lewis	said.	“Dismissed.”


“Final	checks	for	this	shift	are	complete,”	Mitch	said	in	to	his headset.	“Timekeeper.”
“Go,	flight,”	said	the	Timekeeper.
“Time	until	MAV	launch?”
“16	hours,	9	minutes,	40	seconds...	mark.”
“Copy	that.	All	stations:	Flight	Director	shift	change.”	He	took	his headset	off	and	rubbed	his	eyes.
Brendan	Hutch	took	the	headset	from	him	and	put	it	on.	“All	stations,
Flight	Director	is	now	Brendan	Hutch.”
“Call	me	if	anything	happens,”	Mitch	said.	“If	not,	I'll	see	you tomorrow.”
“Get	some	sleep,	boss,”	Brendan	said.
Venkat	watched	from	the	observation	booth.	“Why	ask	the
Timekeeper?”	he	mumbled.	“It's	on	the	huge	mission	clock	in	the	center screen.”
“He's	nervous,”	Annie	said.	“You	don't	often	see	it,	but	that's	what Mitch	Henderson	looks	like	when	he's	nervous.	He	double	and	triple checks	everything.”
“Fair	enough,”	Venkat	said.
“They're	camping	out	on	the	lawn,	by	the	way,”	Annie	said. “Reporters	from	all	over	the	world.	Our	press	rooms	just	don't	have enough	space.”
“The	media	loves	a	drama,”	he	sighed.	“It'll	be	over	tomorrow,	one way	or	another.”
“What's	our	role	in	all	this?”	Annie	said.	“If	something	goes	wrong, what	can	Mission	Control	do?”
“Nothing,”	Venkat	said.	“Not	a	damned	thing.”
“Nothing?”
“It's	all	happening	12	light-minutes	away.	That	means	it	takes	24 minutes	for	them	to	get	the	answer	to	any	question	they	ask.	The	whole launch	is	12	minutes	long.	They're	on	their	own.”
“Oh,”	Annie	said.	“So	we're	just	observers	in	all	this?” “Yes,”	Venkat	said.	“Sucks,	doesn't	it?”


LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	549

I'd	be	lying	if	I	said	I	wasn't	shitting	myself.	In	4	hours,	I'm	going	to ride	a	giant	explosion	into	orbit.	This	is	something	I've	done	a	few	times before,	but	never	with	a	jury-rigged	mess	like	this.
Right	now,	I'm	sitting	in	the	MAV.	I'm	suited	up	because	there's	a	big hole	in	the	front	of	the	ship	where	the	window	and	part	of	the	hull	used	to be.	I'm	“awaiting	launch	instructions.”	Really,	I'm	just	awaiting	launch.	I don't	have	any	part	in	this.	I'm	just	going	to	sit	in	the	acceleration	couch and	hope	for	the	best.
Last	night,	I	ate	my	final	meal	pack.	It's	the	first	good	meal	I've	had
in	weeks.	I'm	leaving	41	potatoes	behind.	That's	how	close	I	came	to starvation.
I	carefully	collected	samples	from	my	entire	journey.	But	I	can't	bring any	of	them	with	me.	So	I	put	them	in	a	container	a	few	hundred	meters from	here.	Maybe	some	day	they'll	send	a	probe	to	collect	them.	May	as well	make	them	easy	to	pick	up.
This	is	it.	There's	nothing	after	this.	There	isn't	even	an	abort procedure.	Why	make	one?	We	can't	delay	the	launch.	Hermes	can't	stop and	wait.	No	matter	what,	we're	launching	on	schedule.
I	face	the	very	real	possibility	that	I'll	die	today.	Can't	say	I	like	it.	It wouldn't	be	so	bad	if	the	MAV	blew	up.	I	wouldn't	know	what	hit	me.
If	I	miss	the	intercept	I'll	just	float	around	in	space	until	I	run	out	of air.	I	have	a	contingency	plan	for	that.	I'll	drop	the	oxygen	mixture	to zero	and	breathe	pure	nitrogen	until	I	suffocate.	It	wouldn't	feel	bad.	The lungs	don't	have	the	ability	to	sense	lack	of	oxygen.	I'd	just	get	tired,	fall asleep,	then	die.
I've	had	my	last	Martian	potato.	I've	slept	in	the	rover	for	the	last time.	I've	had	my	last	EVA	on	the	surface.	I'm	leaving	Mars	today,	one way	or	another.
About	....	time.


	 
Chapter	26

They	gathered.
Everywhere	on	Earth,	they	gathered.
From	Trafalgar	Square	to	Tienanmen	Square	to	Times	Square,	they watched	on	giant	screens.	In	offices	they	huddled	around	computer monitors.	In	bars,	they	stared	silently	at	the	TV	in	the	corner.	In	homes they	sat	breathlessly	on	their	couches,	their	eyes	glued	to	the	story playing	out.
In	Chicago,	a	couple	clutched	each	other's	hands	as	they	watched.	The man	held	his	wife	gently	as	she	rocked	back	and	forth	out	of	sheer	terror. The	NASA	representative	knew	not	to	disturb	them,	but	stood	ready	to answer	any	questions	should	they	ask.
“Fuel	Pressure	green,”	Johanssen's	voice	said	from	a	billion televisions.	“Engine	alignment	perfect.	Communications	5	by	5.	We	are ready	for	preflight	checklist,	Commander.” “Copy,”	came	Lewis's	voice.	“CAPCOM” “Go,”	Johanssen	responded.
“Guidance.”
“Go,”	Johanssen	said	again.
“Remote	Command.” “Go,”	said	Martinez.
“Pilot.”
“Go,”	said	Watney	from	the	MAV.
A	mild	cheer	coruscated	through	the	crowds	worldwide.

Mitch	sat	at	his	station	in	mission	control.	They	monitored	everything and	were	ready	to	help	in	any	way	the	could.	The	communication	latency between	Hermes	and	Earth	made	any	such	need	highly	unlikely.
“Telemetry,”	Lewis's	voice	said	over	the	speakers.
“Go,”	Johanssen	responded.
“Recovery,”	she	continued.
“Go,”	said	Beck	from	the	airlock.
“Secondary	Recovery.”
“Go,”	said	Vogel	from	beside	Beck.
“Mission	control,	this	is	Hermes	Actual,”	Lewis	reported.	“We	are	go for	launch	and	will	proceed	on	schedule.	We	are	T	minus	four	minutes,
10	seconds	to	launch...	mark.”
“Did	you	get	that,	Timekeeper?”	Mitch	said.
“Affirmative,	flight,”	came	the	response.	“Our	clocks	are	synched with	theirs.”
“Not	that	we	can	do	anything,”	Mitch	mumbled,	“But	at	least	we'll know	what's	supposedly	happening.”

“About	four	minutes,	Mark,”	Lewis	said	into	her	mic.	“How	you doing	down	there?”
“Eager	to	get	up	there,	Commander,”	Watney	responded.
“We're	going	to	make	that	happen,”	Lewis	said.	“Remember,	you'll	be pulling	some	pretty	heavy	G's.	It's	ok	to	pass	out.	You're	in	Martinez's hands.”
“Tell	that	asshole	no	barrel-rolls.” “Copy	that,	MAV,”	Lewis	said.
“Four	more	minutes,”	Martinez	said,	cracking	his	knuckles.	“You ready	for	some	flying,	Beth?”
“Yeah,”	Johanssen	said.	“It'll	be	strange	to	sysop	a	launch	and	stay	in zero-g	the	whole	time.”
“I	hadn't	thought	of	it	that	way,”	Martinez	said,	“but	yeah.	I'm	not going	to	be	squashed	against	the	back	my	seat.	Weird.”

Beck	floated	in	the	airlock,	tethered	to	a	wall-mounted	spool.	Vogel stood	beside	him,	his	boots	clamped	to	the	floor.	Both	stared	through	the open	outer	door	to	the	red	planet	below.
“Didn't	think	I'd	be	back	here	again,”	Beck	said.
“Yes,”	Vogel	said.	“We	are	the	first.”
“First	what?”
“We	are	the	first	to	visit	Mars	twice.”
“Oh	yeah.	Even	Watney	can't	say	that.”
“He	cannot.”
They	looked	at	Mars	in	silence	for	a	while.
“Vogel,”	Beck	said.
“Ja.”
“If	I	can't	reach	Mark,	I	want	you	to	release	my	tether.”
“Doctor	Beck,”	Vogel	said,	“The	Commander	has	said	no	to	this.”
“I	know	what	the	Commander	said,	but	if	I	need	a	few	more	meters,	I want	you	to	cut	me	loose.	I	have	an	MMU,	I	can	get	back	without	a tether.”
“I	will	not	do	this,	Doctor	Beck.”
“It's	my	own	life	at	risk,	and	I	say	it's	ok.”
“You	are	not	the	Commander.”
Beck	scowled	at	Vogel,	but	with	their	reflective	visors	down,	the effect	was	lost.
“Fine,”	Beck	said.	“But	I	bet	you'll	change	your	mind	if	push	comes to	shove.”
Vogel	did	not	respond.

“T-minus	10,”	said	Johanssen,	“9...8...” “Main	engines	start,”	said	Martinez.
“7...6...5...mooring	clamps	released...”
“About	5	seconds,	Watney,”	Lewis	said	to	her	headset.	“Hang	on.” “See	you	in	a	few,	Commander,”	Watney	radioed	back.
“4...3...2...”

Watney	lay	in	the	acceleration	couch	as	the	MAV	rumbled	in anticipation	of	liftoff.
“Hmm,”	he	said	to	nobody.	“I	wonder	how	much	longer-”
The	MAV	launched	with	incredible	force.	More	than	any	manned	ship had	accelerated	in	the	history	of	space	travel.	Watney	was	shoved	in	to his	couch	so	hard	he	couldn't	even	grunt.
Having	anticipated	this,	he	had	placed	a	folded	up	shirt	behind	his head	in	the	helmet.	As	his	head	pressed	firmly	in	to	the	makeshift cushion,	the	edges	of	his	vision	became	blurry.	He	could	neither	breathe nor	move.
Directly	in	his	field	of	view,	the	Hab	canvas	patch	flapped	violently as	the	ship	exponentially	gained	speed.	Concentration	became	difficult, but	something	in	the	back	of	his	mind	told	him	that	was	bad.
“Velocity	741	meters	per	second,”	Johanssen	quickly	called	out.
“Altitude	1350	meters.” “Copy,”	Martinez	said.
“That's	low,”	Lewis	said.	“Too	low.”
“I	know,”	Martinez	said.	“It's	sluggish;	fighting	me.	What	the	....	is going	on?”
“Velocity	850,	altitude	1843,”	Johanssen	said.
“I'm	not	getting	the	power	I	need!”	Martinez	said.
“Engine	power	at	100%,”	Johanssen	said.
“I'm	telling	you	it's	sluggish,”	Martinez	insisted.
“Watney,”	Lewis	said	to	her	headset.	“Watney,	do	you	read?	Can	you report?”
Watney	heard	Lewis's	voice	in	the	distance.	Like	someone	talking	to him	through	a	long	tunnel.	He	vaguely	wondered	what	she	wanted.	His attention	was	briefly	drawn	to	the	fluttering	canvas	ahead	of	him.	A	rip had	appeared	and	was	rapidly	widening.
But	then	he	was	distracted	by	a	bolt	in	one	of	the	bulkheads.	It	only had	five	sides.	He	wondered	why	NASA	decided	that	bolt	needed	five sides	instead	of	six.	It	would	require	a	special	wrench	to	tighten	or loosen.
The	canvas	tore	even	further,	the	tattered	material	flapping	wildly.
Through	the	opening,	Watney	saw	red	sky	stretching	out	infinitely	ahead.
“That's	nice,”	he	thought.
As	the	MAV	flew	higher,	the	atmosphere	grew	thinner.	Soon,	the canvas	stopped	fluttering	and	simply	stretched	toward	Mark.	The	sky shifted	from	red	to	black.
“That's	nice,	too,”	Mark	thought.
As	consciousness	slipped	away,	he	wondered	where	he	could	get	a
cool	5-sided	bolt	like	that.

“I'm	getting	more	response	now,”	Martinez	said.
“Back	on	track	with	full	acceleration,”	Johanssen	said.	“Must	have been	drag.	MAV's	out	of	the	atmosphere	now.”
“It	was	like	flying	a	cow,”	Martinez	grumbled,	his	hands	racing	over his	controls.
“Can	you	get	him	up?”	Lewis	asked.
“He'll	get	to	orbit,”	Johanssen	said,	“but	the	intercept	course	may	be compromised.”
“Get	him	up	first,”	Lewis	said.	“Then	we'll	worry	about	intercept.”
“Copy.	Main	engine	cut-off	in	15	seconds.”
“Much	smoother	now,”	Martinez	said.	“It's	not	fighting	me	at	all anymore.”
“Well	below	target	altitude,”	Johanssen	said.	“Velocity	is	good.” “How	far	below?”	Lewis	said.
“Can't	say	for	sure,”	Johanssen	said.	“All	I	have	is	accelerometer data.	We'll	need		radar	pings	at	intervals	to	work	out	his	true	final	orbit.” “Back	to	automatic	guidance,”	Martinez	said.
“Main	shutdown	in	4,”	Johanssen	said	“3...	2...	1...	Shutdown.” “Confirm	shutdown,”	Martinez	said.
“Watney,	you	there?”	Lewis	said.	“Watney?	Watney,	do	you	read?”
“Probably	passed	out,	Commander,”	Beck	said	over	the	radio.	“He pulled	12	G's	on	the	ascent.	Give	him	a	few	minutes.”
“Copy,”	Lewis	said.	“Johanssen,	got	his	orbit	yet?”
“I	have	interval	pings.	Working	out	our	intercept	range	and velocity...”
Martinez	and	Lewis	stared	intensely	at	Johanssen	as	she	brought	up the	intercept	calculation	software.	Normally,	orbits	would	be	worked	out by	Vogel,	but	he	was	otherwise	engaged.	Johanssen	was	his	backup	for orbital	dynamics.
“Intercept	velocity	will	be	11	meters	per	second...”	she	began.
“I	can	make	that	work,”	Beck	said	over	the	radio.
“Distance	at	intercept	will	be-”	She	stopped	and	choked.	Shakily,	she continued.	“We'll	be	68	kilometers	apart.”	She	buried	her	face	in	her hands.
“Did	she	say	68	kilometers!?”	Beck	said.	“Kilometers!?” “God	damn	it,”	Martinez	whispered.
“Keep	it	together,”	Lewis	said.	“Work	the	problem.	Martinez,	is	there any	juice	in	the	MAV?”
“Negative,	Commander,”	Martinez	responded.	“They	ditched	the
OMS	system	to	lighten	the	launch	weight.”
“Then	we'll	have	to	go	to	him.	Johanssen,	time	to	intercept?” “39	minutes,	12	seconds,”	Johanssen	said,	trying	not	to	quaver.
“Vogel,”	Lewis	continued,	“how	far	can	we	deflect	in	39	minutes	with the	ion	engines?”
“Perhaps	5	kilometers,”	he	radioed.
“Not	enough,”	Lewis	said.	“Martinez,	what	if	we	point	our	attitude thrusters	all	the	same	direction?”
“Depends	on	how	much	fuel	we	want	to	save	for	attitude	adjustments on	the	trip	home.”
“How	much	do	you	need?”
“I	could	get	by	with	maybe	20	percent	of	what's	left.”
“All	right,	if	you	used	the	other	80	percent-”
“Checking,”	Martinez	said,	running	the	numbers	on	his	console.
“We'd	get	a	delta-v	of	31	meters	per	second.”
“Johanssen,”	Lewis	said.	“Math.”
“In	39	minutes	we'd	deflect...”	Johanssen	quickly	typed,	“72 kilometers!”
“There	we	go,”	Lewis	said.	“How	much	fuel-”
“Use	75.5	percent	of	remaining	attitude	adjust	fuel,”	Johanssen	said.
“That'll	bring	the	intercept	range	to	zero.” “Do	it,”	Lewis	said.
“Aye,	Commander.”	Martinez	said.
“Hold	on,”	Johanssen	said.	“That'll	get	the	intercept	range	to	zero,	but the	intercept	velocity	will	be	42	meters	per	second.”
“Then	we	have	39	minutes	to	figure	out	how	to	slow	down,”	Lewis said.	“Martinez,	burn	the	jets.”
“Aye.”	Martinez	said.
“Whoa,”	Annie	said	to	Venkat.	“A	lot	of	shit	just	happened	really fast.	Explain.”
Venkat	strained	to	hear	to	speaker	over	the	murmur	of	the	VIPs	in	the observation	booth.	Through	the	glass	he	saw	Mitch	throw	his	hands	up	in frustration.
“The	launch	missed	badly,”	Venkat	said,	looking	past	Mitch	to	the screens	beyond.	“The	intercept	distance	was	going	to	be	way	too	big.	So
they're	using	the	attitude	adjusters	to	close	the	gap.”
“What	do	attitude	adjusters	usually	do?”
“They	rotate	the	ship.	They're	not	made	for	thrusting	it.	Hermes doesn't	have	quick	reaction	engines.	Just	the	slow	steady	ion	engines.” “So...	problem	solved?”	Annie	said	hopefully.
“No,”	Venkat	said.	“They'll	get	to	him,	but	they'll	be	going	42	meters per	second	when	they	get	there.”
“How	fast	is	that?”	Annie	asked.
“About	90	miles	per	hour,”	Venkat	said.	“There's	no	hope	of	Beck grabbing	Watney	at	that	speed.”
“Can	they	use	the	attitude	adjusters	to	slow	down?”
“They	used	all	the	fuel	they	could	to	close	the	gap	in	time.	They	don't have	enough	to	slow	down.”	Venkat	frowned.
“So	what	can	they	do?”
“I	don't	know,”	he	said.	“And	even	if	I	did,	I	couldn't	tell	them	in time.”
“Well	....,”	Annie	said.
“Yeah,”	Venkat	agreed.
“Watney,”	Lewis	said	“Do	you	read?” “Watney?”	She	repeated.
“Commander,”	Beck	radioed.	“He's	wearing	a	surface	EVA	suit, right?”
“Yeah.”
“It	should	have	a	bio-monitor,”	Beck	said.	“And	it'll	be	broadcasting.
It's	not	a	strong	signal;	it's	only	designed	to	go	a	couple	hundred	meters to	the	rover	or	Hab.	But	maybe	we	can	pick	it	up.” “Johanssen,”	Lewis	said.
“On	it,”	Johanssen	said.	“I	have	to	look	up	the	frequencies	in	the	tech specs.	Gimme	a	second.”
“Martinez,”	Lewis	continued.	“Any	idea	how	to	slow	down?”
He	shook	his	head.	“I	got	nothin',	Commander.	We're	just	going	too damn	fast.”
“Vogel?”
“The	ion	drive	is	simply	not	strong	enough,”	Vogel	replied.
“There's	got	to	be	something,”	Lewis	said.	“Something	we	can	do.
Anything.”
“Got	his	biomonitor	data,”	Johanssen	said.	“Pulse	58,	blood	pressure
98/61.”
“That's	not	bad,”	Beck	said.	“Lower	than	I'd	like	but	he's	been	in	Mars gravity	for	18	months,	so	it's	expected.” “Time	to	intercept?”	Lewis	asked. “32	minutes,”	Johanssen	replied.
Blissful	unconsciousness	became	foggy	awareness	which	transitioned into	painful	reality.	Watney	opened	his	eyes,	then	winced	at	the	pain	in his	chest.
Little	remained	of	the	canvas.	Tatters	floated	along	the	edge	of	the hole	it	once	covered.	This	granted	Watney	an	unobstructed	view	of	Mars from	orbit.	The	great	red	planet's	horizon	stretched	out	seemingly	forever as	the	wispy	atmosphere	gave	it	a	fuzzy	edge.	Only	18	people	in	history had	personally	seen	this	view.
“....	you,”	he	said	to	the	planet	below.
Reaching	toward	the	controls	on	his	arm,	he	winced.	Trying	again, more	slowly	this	time,	he	activated	his	radio.	“MAV	to	Hermes.” “Watney!?”	Came	the	reply.
“Affirmative.	That	you,	Commander?”	Watney	said.
“Affirmative.	What's	your	status?”
“I'm	on	a	ship	with	no	control	panel,”	he	said.	“That's	as	much	as	I
can	tell	you.”
“How	do	you	feel?”
“My	chest	hurts.	I	think	I	broke	a	rib.	How	are	you?”
“We're	working	on	getting	you,”	Lewis	said.	“There	was	a complication	in	the	launch.”
“Yeah,”	Watney	said,	looking	out	the	hole	in	the	ship.	“The	canvas didn't	hold.	I	think	it	ripped	early	in	the	ascent.”
“That's	consistent	with	what	we	saw	during	the	launch.” “How	bad	is	it,	Commander?”	He	asked.
“We	were	able	to	correct	the	intercept	range	with	Hermes's	attitude thrusters.	But	there's	a	problem	with	the	intercept	velocity.”
“How	big	a	problem.”
“42	meters	per	second.”
“Well	shit.”

“Hey,	at	least	he's	ok	for	the	moment,”	Martinez	said.
“Beck,”	Lewis	said.	“I'm	coming	around	to	your	way	of	thinking.
How	fast	can	you	get	going	if	you're	untethered?”
“Sorry,	Commander,”	Beck	said.	“I	already	ran	the	numbers.	At	best	I could	get	25	meters	per	second.	Even	if	I	could	get	to	42,	I'd	need	another
42	to	match	Hermes	when	I	came	back.” “Copy,”	Lewis	said.
“Hey,”	Watney	said	over	the	radio,	“I've	got	an	idea.”
“Of	course	you	do,”	Lewis	said.	“What	do	you	got?”
“I	could	find	something	sharp	in	here	and	poke	a	hole	in	the	glove	of my	EVA	suit.	I	could	use	the	escaping	air	as	a	thruster	and	fly	my	way	to you.	The	source	of	thrust	would	be	on	my	arm,	so	I'd	be	able	to	direct	it pretty	easily.”
“How	does	he	come	up	with	this	shit?”	Martinez	interjected.
“Hmm,”	Lewis	said.	“Could	you	get	42	meters	per	second	that	way?” “No	idea,”	Watney	said.
“I	can't	see	you	having	any	control	if	you	did	that,”	Lewis	said. “You'd	be	eyeballing	the	intercept	and	using	a	thrust	vector	you	can barely	control.”
“I	admit	it's	fatally	dangerous,”	Watney	said.	“But	consider	this:	I'd get	to	fly	around	like	Iron	Man.”
“We'll	keep	working	on	ideas,”	Lewis	said. “Iron	Man,	Commander.	Iron	Man.” “Standby,”	Lewis	said.
She	furrowed	her	brow.	“Hmm...	Maybe	it's	not	such	a	bad	idea...”
“You	kidding,	Commander?”	Martinez	said.	“It's	a	terrible	idea.	He'd shoot	off	in	to	space-”
“Not	the	whole	idea,	but	part	of	it,”	she	said.	“Using	atmosphere	as thrust.	Martinez,	get	Vogel's	station	up	and	running.”
“Ok,”	Martinez	said,	typing	at	his	keyboard.	The	screen	changed	to
Vogel's	workstation.	He	quickly	changed	the	language	from	German	to
English.	“It's	up.	What	do	you	need?”
“Vogel's	got	software	for	calculating	course	offsets	caused	by	hull breaches,	right?”
“Yeah,”	Martinez	said.	“It	estimates	course	corrections	needed	in	the event	of-”
“Yeah,	yeah,”	Lewis	said.	“Fire	it	up.	I	want	to	know	what	happens	if we	blow	the	VAL.”
Johanssen	and	Martinez	looked	at	each	other.
“Um.	Yes,	Commander,”	Martinez	said.
“The	Vehicular	Airlock?”	Johanssen	said.	“You	want	to...	open	it?”
“Plenty	of	air	in	the	ship,”	Lewis	said.	“It'd	give	us	a	good	kick.”
“Ye-es...”	Martinez	said	as	he	brought	up	the	software.	“And	it	might blow	the	nose	of	the	ship	off	in	the	process.”
“Also,	all	the	air	would	leave,”	Johanssen	felt	compelled	to	add.
“We'll	seal	the	bridge	and	reactor	room.	We	can	let	everywhere	else go	vacuo,	but	we	don't	want	explosive	decompression	in	here	or	near	the reactor.”
Martinez	entered	the	scenario	in	to	the	software.	“I	think	we'll	just have	the	same	problem	as	Watney,	but	on	a	larger	scale.	We	can't	direct that	thrust.”
“We	don't	have	to,”	Lewis	said.	“The	VAL	is	in	the	nose.	Escaping	air would	make	a	thrust	vector	through	our	center	of	mass.	We	just	need	to point	the	ship	directly	away	from	where	we	want	to	go.”
“Ok	I	have	the	numbers,”	Martinez	said.	“A	breach	at	the	VAL,	with the	bridge	and	reactor	room	sealed	off,	would	accelerate	us	29	meters	per second.”
“We'd	have	a	relative	velocity	of	13	meters	per	second	afterward,” Johanssen	supplied.
“Beck,”	Lewis	radioed,	“Have	you	been	hearing	all	this?”
“Affirmative,	Commander,”	Beck	said.	“
“Can	you	do	13	meters	per	second?”
“It'll	be	risky,”	Beck	replied,	“13	to	match	the	MAV	then	another	13 to	match	Hermes.	But	it's	a	hell	of	a	lot	better	than	42.”
“Johanssen,”	Lewis	said.	“time	to	intercept?”
“18	minutes,	Commander.”
“What	kind	of	jolt	will	we	feel	with	that	breach?”	Lewis	asked	to Martinez.
“The	air	will	take	4	seconds	to	evacuate,”	he	said.	“We'll	feel	a	little less	than	one	g.”
“Watney,”	she	said	to	her	headset,	“We	have	a	plan.” “Yay!	A	plan!”	Watney	replied.
“Houston,”	Lewis's	voice	rang	through	Mission	Control,	“be	advised we	are	going	to	deliberately	breach	the	VAL	to	produce	thrust.” “What?”	Mitch	said.	“What!?”	He	yelled.
“Oh...	my	god,”	Venkat	said	in	the	observation	room.
“....	me	raw,”	Annie	said,	getting	up.	“I	better	get	to	the	press	room.
Any	parting	knowledge	before	I	go?”
“They're	going	to	breach	the	ship,”	Venkat	said,	still	dumbfounded.
“They're	going	to	deliberately	breach	the	ship.	Oh	my	god...” “Got	it,”	Annie	said,	jogging	to	the	door.
“How	will	we	open	the	airlock	doors?”	Martinez	asked.	“There's	no way	to	open	them	remotely,	and	if	anyone's	nearby	when	it	blows-”
“Right,”	Lewis	said.	“We	can	open	one	door	with	the	other	shut,	but how	do	we	open	the	other?”
She	thought	for	a	moment.	“Vogel,”	she	radioed.	“I	need	you	to	come back	in	and	make	a	bomb.”
“Um.	Again,	please,	Commander?”	Vogel	replied.
“A	bomb,”	Lewis	confirmed.	“You're	a	chemist.	Can	you	make	a bomb	out	of	stuff	on	board?”
“Ja,”	Vogel	said.	“We	have	flammables	and	pure	oxygen.” “Sounds	good.”	Lewis	said.
“It	is	of	course	dangerous	to	set	off	an	explosive	device	on	a spacecraft,”	Vogel	said	pragmatically.
“So	make	it	small,”	Lewis	said.	“It	just	needs	to	poke	a	hole	in	the inner	airlock	door.	Any	hole	will	do.	If	it	blows	the	door	off	that's	fine.	If it	doesn't,	the	air	will	get	out	slower,	but	for	longer.	The	momentum change	is	the	same	and	we'll	get	the	acceleration	we	need.”
“Pressurizing	Airlock-2,”	Vogel	reported.	“How	will	we	activate	this bomb?”
“Johanssen?”	Lewis	said.
“Uh...”	Johanssen	said.	She	picked	up	her	headset	and	quickly	put	it on.	“Vogel,	can	you	run	wires	in	to	it?”
“Ja,”	Vogel	said.	“I	will	use	threaded	stopper	with	a	small	hole	for	the wires.	It	will	have	little	effect	on	the	seal.”
“We	could	run	the	wire	to	lighting	panel	41,”	Johanssen	said.	“It's next	to	the	airlock,	and	I	can	turn	it	on	and	off	from	here.”
“There's	our	remote	trigger,”	Lewis	said.	“Johanssen	go	set	up	the lighting	panel.	Vogel,	get	in	here	and	make	the	bomb.	Martinez,	go	close and	seal	the	doors	to	the	reactor	room.”
“Yes	Commander,”	Johanssen	said,	kicking	off	her	seat	toward	the hallway.
“Commander,”	Martinez	said,	pausing	at	the	exit,	“You	want	me	to bring	back	some	space	suits?”
“No	point,”	Lewis	said.	“If	the	seal	on	the	bridge	doesn't	hold	we'll get	sucked	out	at	close	to	the	speed	of	sound.	We'll	be	jelly	with	or without	suits	on.”
“Roger,	Commander.”
“Are	you	back	in	yet,	Vogel?”	Lewis	asked.
“I	am	just	re-entering	now,	Commander.”
“Beck,”	Lewis	said	to	her	headset.	“I'll	need	you	back	in,	too.	But don't	take	your	suit	off.”
“Ok,”	Beck	said.	“Why?”
“We're	going	to	have	to	literally	blow	up	one	of	the	doors,”	Lewis explained.	“I'd	rather	we	kill	the	inner	one.	I	want	the	outer	door unharmed	so	we	keep	our	smooth	aerobraking	shape.”
“Makes	sense.”	Beck	responded	as	he	floated	back	in	to	the	ship.
“One	problem,”	Lewis	said.	“I	want	the	outer	door	locked	in	the	fully open	position	with	the	mechanical	stopper	in	place	to	keep	it	from	being trashed	by	the	decompress.”
“You	have	to	have	someone	in	the	airlock	to	do	that,”	Beck	said.
“And	you	can't	open	the	inner	door	if	the	outer	door	is	locked	open.”
“Right,”	Lewis	said.	“I	need	you	to	go	to	the	VAL,	depressurize,	and lock	the	outer	door	open.	Then	you'll	need	to	crawl	along	the	hull	to	get back	to	Airlock	2.”
“Copy,	Commander,”	Beck	said.	“There	are	latch	points	all	over	the hull.	I'll	move	my	tether	along,	mountain	climber	style.”
“Get	to	it,”	Lewis	said.	“And	Vogel,	you're	in	a	hurry.	You	have	to make	the	bomb,	set	it	up,	get	back	to	Airlock	2,	suit	up,	depressurize	it, and	open	the	outer	door	so	Beck	can	get	in.”
“He's	taking	his	suit	off	right	now	and	can't	reply,”	Beck	reported, “but	he	heard	the	order.”

“Watney,	how	you	doing?”	Lewis's	voice	said	in	his	ear.
“Fine	so	far,	Commander,”	Watney	replied.	“You	mentioned	a	plan?”
“Affirmative,”	she	said.	“We're	going	to	vent	atmosphere	to	get thrust.”
“How?”
“We're	going	to	blow	a	hole	in	the	VAL.”
“What!?”	Watney	said.	“How!?”
“Vogel's	making	a	bomb.”
“I	knew	that	guy	was	a	mad	scientist!”	Watney	said.	“I	think	we should	just	go	with	my	Iron	Man	idea.”
“That's	too	risky	and	you	know	it,”	she	replied.
“Thing	is,”	Watney	said,	“I'm	selfish.	I	want	the	memorials	back home	to	be	just	for	me.	I	don't	want	the	rest	of	you	losers	in	them.	I	can't let	you	guys	blow	the	VAL.”
“Oh,”	Lewis	said.	“Well	if	you	won't	let	us	then-	wait...	wait	a minute...	I'm	looking	at	my	shoulder	patch	and	it	turns	out	I'm	the Commander.	Sit	tight.	We're	coming	to	get	you.”
“Smart-ass.”

Being	a	chemist,	Vogel	knew	how	to	make	a	bomb.	In	fact,	much	of his	training	was		to	avoid	making	them	by	mistake.
The	ship	had	few	flammables	aboard,	due	to	the	fatal	danger	of	fire. But	food,	by	its	very	nature,	contained	flammable	hydrocarbons.	Lacking time	to	sit	down	and	do	the	math,	he	estimated.
Sugar	has	4000	food-calories	per	kilogram.	One	food-calorie	is	4184 Joules.	Sugar	in	zero-g	will	float	and	the	grains	will	separate,	maximizing surface	area.	In	a	pure	oxygen	environment,	16.7	million	Joules	will	be released	for	every	kilogram	of	sugar	used,	releasing	the	explosive	force of	8	sticks	of	dynamite.	Such	is	the	nature	of	combustion	in	pure	oxygen.
Vogel	measured	the	sugar	carefully.	He	poured	it	into	the	strongest container	he	could	find,	a	thick	glass	beaker.	The	strength	of	the container	was	as	important	as	the	explosive.	A	weak	container	would simply	cause	a	fireball	without	much	concussive	force.	A	strong container,	however,	would	contain	the	pressure	until	it	reached	trus destructive	potential.
He	quickly	drilled	a	hole	in	the	stopper,	then	stripped	a	section	of wire.	He	ran	the	wire	through	the	hole.
“Sehr	gefährlich,”	he	mumbled	as	he	poured	liquid	oxygen	from	the ship's	supply	in	to	the	container,	then	quickly	screwed	the	stopper	on.	In just	a	few	minutes,	he	had	made	a	rudimentary	pipe	bomb.
“Sehr,	sehr,	gefährlich,”
He	floated	out	of	the	lab	and	made	his	way	toward	the	nose	of	the ship.

Johanssen	worked	on	the	lighting	panel	as	Beck	floated	toward	the airlock.
She	grabbed	his	arm.	“Be	careful	crawling	along	the	hull.”
He	turned	to	face	her.	“Be	careful	setting	up	the	bomb.”
She	kissed	his	faceplate	then	looked	away,	embarrassed.	“That	was stupid.	Don't	tell	anyone	I	did	that.”
“Don't	tell	anyone	I	liked	it,”	Beck	smiled.
He	entered	the	airlock	and	sealed	the	inner	door.	After	depressurizing, he	opened	the	outer	door	and	locked	it	in	place.	Grabbing	a	handrail	on the	hull,	he	pulled	himself	out.
Johanssen	watched	until	he	was	no	longer	in	view,	then	returned	to the	lighting	panel.	She	had	deactivated	it	earlier	from	her	workstation. Pulling	a	length	of	the	cable	out	and	stripping	the	ends,	she	fiddled	with	a roll	of	electrical	tape	until	Vogel	arrived.
He	showed	up	just	a	minute	later,	carefully	floating	down	the	hall with	the	bomb	held	in	both	hands.
“I	have	used	a	single	wire	for	igniting,”	he	explained.	“I	did	not	want to	risk	two	wires	for	a	spark.	It	would	be	dangerous	to	us	if	we	had	static while	setting	up.”
“How	do	we	set	it	off?”	Johanssen	said.
“The	wire	must	reach	a	high	temperature.	If	you	short	power	through it,	that	will	be	sufficient.”
“I'll	have	to	pin	the	breaker,”	Johanssen	said,	“but	it'll	work.” She	twisted	the	lighting	wires	to	the	bomb's	and	taped	them	off.
“Excuse	me,”	Vogel	said.	“I	have	to	return	to	Airlock	2	to	let	Dr.
Beck	back	in.”
“Mm,”	Johanssen	said.

Martinez	floated	back	in	to	the	bridge.	“I	had	a	few	minutes,	so	I	ran through	the	aerobrake	lockdown	checklist	for	the	reactor	room.
Everything's	ready	for	acceleration	and	the	compartment's	sealed	off.”
“Good	thinking,”	Lewis	said.	“Prep	the	attitude	correction.”
“Roger,	Commander.”	Martinez	said,	drifting	to	his	station.	“It'll	take me	a	sec...	I	need	to	do	everything	backward.	The	VAL's	in	front,	so	the source	of	thrust	will	be	exactly	opposite	to	our	engines.	Our	software wasn't	expecting	us	to	have	an	engine	there.	I	just	need	to	tell	it	we	plan to	thrust	toward	Mark.”
“Take	your	time	and	get	it	right,”	Lewis	said.	“And	don't	execute	till	I give	you	the	word.	We're	not	spinning	the	ship	around	while	Beck's	out on	the	hull.”
“Roger.”	He	said.	After	a	moment,	he	added	“Ok,	the	adjustment's ready	to	execute.”
“Standby.”	Lewis	said.

Vogel,	back	in	his	suit,	depressurized	Airlock	2	and	opened	the	outer door.
“Bout	time,”	Beck	said,	climbing	in.
“Sorry	for	the	delay,”	Vogel	said.	“I	was	required	to	make	a	bomb.”
“This	has	been	kind	of	a	weird	day,”	Beck	said.	“Commander,	Vogel and	I	are	in	position.”
“Copy,”	came	Lewis's	response.	“Get	up	against	the	fore	wall	of	the airlock.	It's	going	to	be	about	one	g	for	four	seconds.	Make	sure	you're both	tethered	in.”
“Copy,”	Beck	said	as	he	attached	his	tether.	The	two	men	pressed themselves	against	the	wall.

“Ok,	Martinez,”	Lewis	said,	“Point	us	the	right	direction.” “Copy,”	said	Martinez,	executing	the	attitude	adjustment.
Johanssen	floated	in	to	the	bridge	as	the	adjustment	was	performed. The	room	rotated	around	her	as	she	reached	for	a	handhold.	“The	bomb's ready,	and	the	breaker's	jammed	closed,”	she	said.	“I	can	set	it	off	by remotely	turning	on	Lighting	Panel	41.”
“Seal	the	bridge	and	get	to	your	station,”	Lewis	said.
“Copy,”	Johanssen	said.	Unstowing	the	emergency	seal,	she	plugged the	entrance	to	the	bridge.	With	a	few	turns	of	the	crank,	the	job	was done.	She	returned	to	her	station	and	ran	a	quick	test.	“Increasing	Bridge pressure	to	1.03	atmospheres...	pressure	is	steady	we	have	a	good	seal.” “Copy,”	Lewis	said.	“Time	to	intercept?”
“28	seconds,”	Johanssen	said.
“Wow,”	Martinez	said.	“We	cut	that	pretty	close.” “You	ready,	Johanssen?”	Lewis	asked.
“Yes,”	Johanssen	said.	“All	I	have	to	do	is	hit	enter.”
“Martinez,	how's	our	angle?”
“Dead-on,	Commander,”	Martinez	reported.
“Strap	in,”	Lewis	said.
The	three	of	them	tightened	the	restraints	of	their	chairs. “20	seconds,”	Johanssen	said.

Teddy	took	his	seat	in	the	VIP	room.	“What's	the	status?”	He	asked.
“15	seconds	till	they	blow	the	VAL,”	Venkat	said.	“Where	have	you been?”
“On	the	phone	with	the	President,”	Teddy	said.	“Do	you	think	this will	work?”
“I	have	no	idea,”	Venkat	said.	“I've	never	felt	this	helpless	in	my life.”
“If	it's	any	consolation,”	Teddy	said,	“Pretty	much	everyone	in	the world	feels	the	same	way.”
On	the	other	side	of	the	glass,	Mitch	paced	to	and	fro.

“5...	4...	3...”	Johanssen	said.
“Brace	for	acceleration,”	Lewis	said.
“2...	1...”	Johanssen	continued.	“Activating	Panel	41.” She	pressed	enter.
Inside	Vogel's	bomb,	the	full	current	of	the	ship's	internal	lighting system	flowed	through	a	thin,	exposed	wire.	It	quickly	reached	the ignition	temperature	of	the	sugar.	What	would	have	been	a	minor	fizzle in	Earth's	atmosphere	became	an	uncontrolled	conflagration	in	the container's	pure	oxygen	environment.	In	under	100	milliseconds,	the massive	combustion	pressure	burst	the	container	and	the	resulting explosion	ripped	the	airlock	door	to	shreds.
The	internal	air	of	Hermes	rushed	through	the	open	VAL,	blasting Hermes	in	the	other	direction.
Vogel	and	Beck	were	pressed	against	the	wall	of	Airlock	2.	Lewis, Martinez,	and	Johanssen	endured	the	acceleration	in	their	seats.	It	was not	a	dangerous	amount	of	force,	in	fact	it	was	less	than	the	force	of Earth's	surface	gravity.	But	it	was	inconsistent	and	jerky.
After	four	seconds,	the	shaking	died	down	and	the	ship	returned	to weightlessness.
“Reactor	room	still	pressurized,”	Martinez	reported. “Bridge	seal	holding,”	Johanssen	said.	“Obviously.” “Damage?”	Martinez	said.
“Not	sure	yet,”	Johanssen	said.	“I	have	External	Camera	four	pointed along	the	nose.	I	don't	see	any	problems	with	the	hull	near	the	VAL.”
“Worry	about	that	later,”	Lewis	said.	“What's	our	relative	velocity and	distance	to	MAV?”
Johanssen	typed	quickly.	“We'll	get	within	22	meters	and	we're	at	12 meters	per	second.	We	actually	got	better	than	expected	thrust.” “Watney,”	Lewis	said.	“It	worked.	Beck's	on	his	way.” “Score!”	Watney	responded.
“Beck,”	Lewis	said.	“You're	up.	12	meters	per	second.” “Close	enough!”	Beck	replied.

“I'm	going	to	jump	out,”	Beck	said.	“Should	get	me	another	two	or three	meters	per	second.”
“Understood,”	Vogel	said,	loosely	gripping	Beck's	tether.	“Good	luck,
Dr.	Beck.”
Placing	his	feet	on	the	back	wall,	Beck	coiled	and	leaped	out	of	the airlock.
Once	free,	he	got	his	bearings.	A	quick	look	to	his	right	showed	him what	he	could	not	see	from	inside	the	airlock.
“I	have	visual!”	he	said.	“I	can	see	MAV!	Jesus,	Mark,	what	did	you do	to	that	thing?”
“You	should	see	what	I	did	to	the	rover,”	Watney	radioed	back.
Beck	thrusted	on	an	intercept	course.	He	had	practiced	this	many times.	The	presumption	in	those	practice	sessions	was	that	he'd	be rescuing	a	crewmate	whose	tether	had	broken,	but	the	principle	was	the same.
“Johanssen,”	he	said,	“You	got	me	on	radar?” “Affirmative,”	she	replied.
“Call	out	my	relative	velocity	to	Mark	every	2	seconds	or	so.”
“Copy.	5.2	meters	per	second.”
“Hey	Beck,”	Watney	said.	“The	front's	wide	open.	I'll	get	up	there	and be	ready	to	grab	at	you.”
“Negative,”	interrupted	Lewis.	“No	untethered	movement.	Stay strapped	to	your	chair	until	you're	latched	to	Beck.” “Copy,”	Watney	said.
“3.1	meters	per	second,”	Johanssen	reported.
“Going	to	coast	for	a	bit,”	Beck	said.	“Gotta	catch	up	before	I	slow	it down.”	He	rotated	himself	in	preparation	for	the	next	burn. “11	meters	to	target,”	Johanssen	said.
“Copy.”
“6	meters,”	Johanssen	said.
“Aaaaand,	counter-thrusting.”	Beck	said,	firing	the	MMU	thrusters again.	The	MAV	loomed	before	him.	“Velocity?”	He	asked.
“1.1	meters	per	second,”	Johanssen	said.
“Good	enough,”	he	said,	reaching	for	the	ship.	“I'm	drifting	toward	it.
I	think	I	can	get	my	hand	on	some	of	the	torn	canvas...”
The	tattered	canvas	beckoned	as	the	only	handhold	on	the	otherwise smooth	ship.	Beck	reached,	extending	as	best	he	could,	and	managed	to grab	hold.
“Contact,”	Beck	said.	Firming	his	grip,	he	pulled	his	body	forward and	lashed	out	with	his	other	hand	to	grab	more	canvas.	“Firm	contact!”
“Dr.	Beck,”	Vogel	said.	“We	have	past	closest	approach	point	and	you are	now	getting	further	away.	You	have	169	meters	of	tether	left.	Enough for	14	seconds.”
“Copy,”	Beck	said.
Pulling	his	head	to	the	opening,	he	looked	inside	the	compartment	to see	Watney	strapped	to	his	chair.
“Visual	on	Watney!”	He	reported.
“Visual	on	Beck!”	Watney	reported.
“How	ya	doin',	man?”	Beck	said,	pulling	himself	in	to	the	ship.
“I...	I	just...”	Watney	said.	“Give	me	a	minute.	You're	the	first	person
I've	seen	in	18	months.”
“We	don't	have	a	minute,”	Beck	said,	kicking	off	the	wall.	“We've	got
11	seconds	before	we	run	out	of	tether.”
Beck's	course	took	him	to	the	chair	where	he	clumsily	collided	with Watney.	The	two	gripped	each	others'	arms	to	keep	Beck	from	bouncing away.	“Contact	with	Watney!”	Beck	said.
“8	seconds,	Dr.	Beck,”	Vogel	radioed.
“Copy,”	Beck	said	as	he	hastily	latched	the	front	of	his	suit	to	the front	of	Watney's	with	tether	clips.	“Connected,”	he	said.
Watney	released	the	straps	on	his	chair.	“Restraints	off.”
“We're	outa'	here,”	Beck	said,	kicking	off	the	chair	toward	the opening.
The	two	men	floated	across	the	MAV	cabin	to	the	opening.	Beck reached	out	his	arm	and	pushed	off	the	edge	as	they	passed	through.
“We're	out,”	Beck	reported.
“5	seconds,”	Vogel	said.
“Relative	velocity	to	Hermes:	12	meters	per	second,”	Johanssen	said.
“Thrusting,”	Beck	said,	activating	his	MMU.
The	two	accelerated	toward	Hermes	for	a	few	seconds.	Then	the MMU	controls	on	Beck's	heads-up	display	turned	red. “That's	it	for	the	fuel,”	Beck	said.	“Velocity?” “5	meters	per	second,”	Johanssen	replied.
“Standby,”	Vogel	said.	Throughout	the	process,	he	had	been	feeding tether	out	of	the	airlock.	Now	he	gripped	the	ever-shrinking	remainder	of the	rope	with	both	hands.	He	didn't	clamp	down	on	it;	that	would	pull	him out	of	the	airlock.	He	simply	closed	his	hands	over	the	tether	to	create friction.
Hermes	pulled	Beck	and	Watney	along,	with	Vogel's	use	of	the	tether acting	as	a	shock	absorber.	If	Vogel	used	too	much	force	the	shock	of	it would	pull	the	tether	free	from	Beck's	suit	clips.	If	he	used	too	little	the tether	would	run	out	before	they	matched	speeds,	then	it	would	have	a hard	stop	at	the	end,	which	would	also	rip	it	out	of	Beck's	suit	clips.
Vogel	managed	to	find	the	balance.	After	a	few	seconds	of	tense,	gutfeel	physics,	Vogel	felt	the	force	on	the	tether	abate.
“Velocity	0!”	Johanssen	reported	excitedly.
“Reel	'em	in,	Vogel,”	Lewis	said.
“Copy,”	Vogel	said.	Hand	over	hand,	he	slowly	pulled	his	crewmates toward	the	airlock.	After	a	few	seconds,	he	stopped	actively	pulling	and simply	took	in	the	line	as	they	coasted	toward	him.
They	floated	in	to	the	airlock,	and	Vogel	grabbed	them.	Beck	and Watney	both	reached	for	handholds	on	the	wall	as	Vogel	worked	his	way around	them	and	closed	the	outer	door.
“Aboard!”	Beck	said.
“Airlock	2	outer	door	closed,”	Vogel	said.
“Yes!”	Martinez	yelled.
“Copy,”	Lewis	said.

Lewis's	voice	echoed	across	the	world:	“Houston,	this	is	Hermes
Actual.	Six	crew	safely	aboard.”
The	control	room	exploded	with	applause.	Leaping	from	their	seats, they	cheered,	hugged,	and	cried.	The	same	scene	played	out	all	over	the world	in	parks,	bars,	civic	centers,	living	rooms,	classrooms,	and	offices.
Mitch	haggardly	pulled	off	his	headset	and	turned	to	face	the	VIP room.	Through	the	glass,	he	saw	various	well-suited	men	and	women cheering	wildly.	He	looked	at	Venkat	and	let	out	a	heavy	sigh	of	relief.
Venkat	put	his	head	in	his	hands	and	whispered	“Thank	the	gods.”
Teddy	pulled	a	blue	folder	from	his	briefcase	and	stood.	“Annie	will be	wanting	me	in	the	press	room.”
“Guess	you	don't	need	the	red	folder	today,”	Venkat	said.
“Honestly,	I	didn't	make	one.”	As	he	walked	out	he	added	“Good work,	Venk.	Now	get	them	home.”


LOG	ENTRY:	MISSION	DAY	687

That	“687”	caught	me	off	guard	for	a	minute.	On	Hermes,	we	track
time	by	mission	days.	It	may	be	Sol	549	down	on	Mars,	but	it's	Mission Day	687	up	here.	And	you	know	what?	It	doesn't	matter	what	time	it	is	on Mars	cause	I'M	NOT	....	THERE!
Oh	my	god.	I'm	really	not	on	Mars	anymore.	I	can	tell	because	there's no	gravity	and	there	are	other	humans	around.	I'm	still	adjusting.
If	this	were	a	movie,	everyone	would	have	been	in	the	airlock	and there	would	have	been	high-fives	all	around.	But	it	didn't	pan	out	that way.
I	broke	two	ribs	during	the	MAV	ascent.	They	were	sore	the	whole time,	but	they	really	started	screaming	when	Vogel	pulled	us	in	to	the airlock	by	the	tether.	I	didn't	want	to	distract	the	people	who	were	saving my	life	so	I	muted	off	my	mic	and	screamed	like	a	little	girl.
It's	true,	you	know.	In	space,	no	one	can	hear	you	scream	like	a	little girl.
Once	they	got	me	in	to	Airlock	2,	they	opened	the	inner	door	and	I was	finally	aboard	again.	Hermes	was	still	in	vacuo,	so	we	didn't	have	to cycle	the	airlock.
Beck	told	me	to	go	limp	and	pushed	me	down	the	corridor toward	his quarters	(which	serve	as	the	ship's	“sick	bay”	when	needed).
Vogel	went	the	other	direction	and	closed	the	outer	VAL	door.
Once	Beck	and	I	got	to	his	quarters,	we	waited	for	the	ship	to repressurize.	Hermes	had	enough	spare	air	to	refill	the	ship	two	more times	if	needed.	It'd	be	a	pretty	shitty	long-range	ship	if	it	couldn't recover	from	a	decompression.
Once	Johanssen	gave	us	the	all	clear,	Dr.	Bossy-Beck	made	me	wait while	he	first	took	off	his	suit,	then	took	off	mine.	After	he	pulled	my helmet	off,	he	looked	shocked.	I	thought	maybe	I	had	a	major	headwound	or	something,	but	it	turns	out	it	was	the	smell.
It's	been	a	while	since	I	washed...	anything.
After	that,	it	was	x-rays	and	chest	bandages	while	the	rest	of	the	crew waited	outside.
Then	came	the	(painful)	high-fives,	followed	by	people	staying	as	far away	from	my	stench	as	possible.	We	had	a	few	minutes	of	reunion before	Beck	shuttled	everyone	out.	He	gave	me	painkillers	and	told	me	to shower	as	soon	as	I	could	freely	move	my	arms.
So	now	I'm	waiting	for	the	drugs	to	kick	in.	My	ribs	hurt	like	hell,	my vision	is	still	blurry	from	acceleration	sickness,	I'm	really	hungry,	it'll	be another	211	days	before	I'm	back	on	Earth,	and	apparently	I	smell	like	a skunk	took	a	shit	on	some	sweat	socks. This	is	the	happiest	day	of	my	life.
Watney	finished	his	two	slices	of	pizza	and	a	coke.	He	had	another half-hour	to	kill	before	going	back	to	Johnson	Space	Center.	Leaving	the pizzeria,	he	sat	on	a	public	bench	just	outside.
Next	week	would	be	busy.	He	would	be	meeting	the	Ares-6	Engineer. He	had	read	her	file,	but	had	never	met	her	in	person.	He	wouldn't	get much	time	to	relax	after	that.	The	following	six	weeks	would	be	filled with	constant	training	as	he	tried	to	impart	as	much	knowledge	as	he could.
But	that	was	something	to	worry	about	later.	Right	now,	he	took	a deep	breath	of	the	fresh	air	and	watched	the	people	go	by.
“Hey,	I	know	you!”	Came	a	voice	from	behind.
A	young	boy	had	strayed	from	his	mother.	“You're	Mark	Watney!”
“Sweetie,”	the	boy's	mom	said,	embarrassed.	“Don't	bother	people like	that.”
“It's	ok,”	Watney	shrugged.
“You	went	to	Mars!”	The	boy	said,	his	eyes	wide	with	awe.
“Sure	did,”	Watney	said.	“Almost	didn't	make	it	back.”
“I	know!”	Said	the	boy.	“That	was	awesome!”
“Sweetie!”	The	mom	scolded.	“That's	rude.”
“So	Mr.	Watney,”	the	boy	said,	“If	you	could	go	to	Mars	again,	like, if	there	was	another	mission	and	they	wanted	you	to	go,	would	you	go?”
Watney	scowled	at	him.	“You	out	of	your	....	mind?”
“Ok	time	to	go,”	the	mom	said,	quickly	herding	the	boy	away.	They receded	in	to	the	crowded	sidewalk.
Watney	snorted	in	their	direction.	Then	he	closed	his	eyes	and	felt	the sun	on	his	face.	It	was	a	nice,	boring	afternoon.
	 
Copyright	Info

“The	Martian”	is	copyright	©	Andy	Weir,	2011.	All	rights	reserved.
The	cover	art	is	an	image	from	NASA	and	is	public	domain. All	fonts	in	this	document	are	public	domain.

Redistribution	of	this	e-book	is	permitted,	so	long	as	it	is	distributed for	free.
